                                          A GUIDEBOOK ON  CLIMATE SCENARIOS  USING CLIMATE INFORMATION TO GUIDE ADAPTATION RESEARCH AND DECISIONS  2016 EDITION    Suggested citation: Charron, I. (2016). A Guidebook on Climate Scenarios: Using  Climate Information to Guide Adaptation Research and Decisions, 2016 Edition.  Ouranos, 94p.  ISBN (Impression): 978-2-923292-19-9  ISBN (PDF online): 978-2-923292-21-2  Copies of this guidebook can be downloaded from  www.ouranos.ca  May 2016  With support from Natural Resources Canada through the Adaptation Platform    550 Sherbrooke West, 19th floor Montreal, Quebec,  H3A1B9, Canada Tel: 514-282-6464 Fax: 514-282-7131 www.ouranos.ca  CONSORTIUM ON REGIONAL CLIMATOLOGY AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE    IV  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS A large number of contributors must be thanked for providing valuable feedback on the first and second  versions of the guidebook:   › Valérie Bourduas Crouhen, Dominique Paquin, Travis Logan, Diane Chaumont, Caroline Larrivée, Hélène  Côté, Marco Braun, David Huard, Patrick Grenier, and Ramón deElía (Ouranos)   › René Pigeon, Don Lemmen, Mary-Ann Wilson, Pamela Kertland, John Sommerville, Liam Miller, and  David Price (Natural Resources Canada)   › Al Douglas (Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources)  › Trevor Murdock (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium)  › Linda Mortsch, Greg Flato, Jamie Smith, Grace Koshida, Marjorie Shepherd, Stewart Cohen, Xuebin   Zhang, Kevin Anderson and Benita Tam (Environment Canada)  › Dave Spittlehouse (BC Provincial Government)  › Éric Larrivée (Ministère du Développement durable, Environnement, Faune et Parcs du Québec)  › Nathalie Martel (Bureau des changements climatiques et de la santé, Québec)  › Kate Germain (Chaire de tourisme Transat – Réseau de veille en tourisme)  For this second version, a large number of organizations and individuals helped organize seminars and  workshops that served to gather feedback and led to a revision of the information presented in this update:   › ICLEI  › Ontario Climate Commissioner  › Ontario Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change  › Manitoba Hydro  › Manitoba Government  › Forestry Community of Practice  › Forestry Adaptation working group (NRCan)  › Association minière du Québec  Special thanks are given to Travis Logan (Ouranos) for producing a large number of the maps and figures  presented in the guidebook and to Valérie Bourduas Crouhen for designing and formatting the document  and for her help with the organization of workshops.     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  V  FOREWORD  The “Guidebook on Climate Scenarios: Using Climate Information to Guide Adaptation Research and  Decisions” was first published in the fall of 2014 and has since proven to be a useful tool of reference for  both the climate change adaptation community and for those wanting to communicate climate information  to decision-makers.  Since its publication, the guidebook has been the subject of numerous presentations  through different conferences, seminars, and webinars. It has also been tested through a series of workshops  with users from different sectors of activity. Many of these presentations and workshops were designed to  understand how the document was being used and to obtain specific feedback on the content presented in  the guide. This updated version of the guidebook on climate scenarios was modified based on comments  obtained by users throughout this process.  Both the original guidebook, the subsequent testing of the document, and this updated version were all  funded by Natural Resources Canada under the Adaptation Platform Program. The Platform’s Regional  Adaptation Collaborative (RAC) and Tools Working Group identified this as an important need for adaptation  decision-making which would build on the results of the RAC and Tools Program (2009-2012). The RAC  and Tools Program was a $35 million, cost-shared initiative to support collaborative action towards the  development of resources and tools to help local practitioners and decision-makers reduce the risks and  maximize opportunities arising from a changing climate.  Users of the Guidebook are invited to send questions and comments to Isabelle Charron :  charron.isabelle@ouranos.ca.  http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca mailto:charron.isabelle@ouranos.ca   VI  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Climate change is unequivocal. There is ample evidence from around the globe that changes have already  occurred. This reality is forcing decision-makers to evaluate the potential impacts, risks, vulnerabilities and  opportunities that climate change presents. The development of adaptation plans and actions to adjust to  this new reality requires decision-makers to increase their understanding of climate information. However,  given the complexity of climate science, climate change information often remains difficult to understand by  many users.   There is clear need for providers of climate information to find different ways to present information in  order to engage stakeholders from different sectors. This transfer of knowledge between climate scientists  and users must not only include the climate information itself, but also a discussion about how climate  information is produced and about the uncertainties that are associated with this information. These  uncertainties are often viewed as barriers to climate change adaptation but a better understanding of them,  and more importantly, a better comprehension of how they affect the interpretation of future impacts can  alleviate some of the challenges associated with using climate information.   This guidebook is meant to address some of the main challenges practitioners of adaptation to climate change  often face in using climate information. The main goals are to increase their capacity to better understand  climate information, to better evaluate their own climate information needs, and to become more critical of  the information that is provided to them.  This guide is arguably most useful to those with limited climate information experience as it provides a  general introduction of many concepts related to climate science and climate scenarios production. Given  the complexity of climate science, the document highlights the importance of working in collaboration with  climate service providers and will help users engage more easily with them.   For users more familiar with climate information, or those who regularly use climate data, the document will  help identify ways to best showcase their results for different target audiences. Indeed, it is not uncommon  for users who are very familiar with climate information to have to translate that information for users or  stakeholders who are themselves not as comfortable with such information.  The guide is divided into five chapters. Chapter 1 provides fact sheets of key concepts in future climate  modeling. This section helps users become more familiar with climate science jargon, which is often necessary  to better understand climate information; Chapter 2 outlines a framework to categorize climate information  in terms of its purpose and complexity into three categories: basic, intermediate, and detailed. This section  uses a decision-tree approach to helps users better formulate their climate information needs; Chapter 3  provides a catalogue of climate information formats that can be associated to one of the three categories  identified in the previous chapter. This section describes different ways in which climate information may  be provided to different users based on their level of expertise and preference; Chapter 4 discusses best  practices in using future climate information given its inherent uncertainty; Chapter 5 highlights some case  studies of how climate information can be used to guide decisions in climate change adaptation.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  VII  KEY MESSAGES  FOR THE INTERPRETATION AND USE OF CLIMATE INFORMATION  › Take the time to properly evaluate your needs regarding climate information.   › Interaction with climate service or information providers is of utmost importance throughout the planning or    decision process- make sure that the provider understands your issues.   › Seek advice and guidance from climate service providers and/or boundary organizations if the level of complexity    of the information you seek is beyond the current capacity of your organization.   › The same climate information can be presented or tailored using different formats – work in collaboration with    climate service providers to find a format that works best for your specific needs.   › Choosing the most adequate information product and format can ensure that the information is well understood    and hence used most efficiently.   › All types of climate information can be equally valuable – basic information can inform decisions just as well as    detailed information.   › Do not rely solely on the mean or median scenario – the range (i.e. the uncertainty) in model projections should    always be considered.   › There is no such thing as the best climate scenario – the use of an ensemble of simulations is crucial.   › Understand the limitations of the climate information used and make sure the information is interpreted    correctly.   › The natural variability in the climate is valuable information– use it to put the projected changes into       perspective.   › Finer spatial resolution is not always needed and does not always yield better information.   › The relative importance of sources of uncertainty varies over time and therefore impact the decision-making    process differently.    VIII  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  LIST OF ACRONYMES CMIP . . . . Coupled Model Intercomparison Project  CRCM . . . . Canadian Regional Climate Model  DJF . . . . December, January, February (Winter)  EVT . . . . Extreme Value Theory  GCM . . . . Global Climate Model  GEV . . . . Generalized Extreme Value  GHG . . . . Greenhouse House Gazes  ICLEI . . . . International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives  IPCC . . . . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  JJA . . . . June, July, August (Summer)  MAM . . . . March, April, May (Spring)  NRCan . . . . Natural Resources Canada  OCCIAR . . . . Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources  PCIC . . . . Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium  RCM . . . . Regional Climate Model  RCP . . . . Representative Concentration Pathway  SON . . . . September, October, November (Fall)  SRES . . . . Special Report on Emissions Scenarios  WMO . . . . World Meteorological Organization    TABLE OF CONTENT    X  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  INTRODUCTION  1 THE NEED FOR THIS GUIDE 2  DEFINING ADAPTATION AND DECISION-MAKER 2  TARGET AUDIENCE  4  OBJECTIVES  4  HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE 4  CHAPTER ONE - CLIMATE MODEL CONCEPTS 6 1.1 NATURAL CLIMATE VARIABILITY 7  1.2 CLIMATE CHANGE 8  1.3 CLIMATE MODELS  9  1.4 EMISSIONS SCENARIOS 11  1.5 CLIMATE SIMULATIONS 14  1.6 CLIMATE PROJECTIONS 16   1.6.1 COUPLED MODEL INTERCOMPARAISON PROJECT (CMIP) 17  1.7 SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN CLIMATE PROJECTIONS 18  1.8 SIMULATION ENSEMBLE 20  1.9 DOWNSCALING TECHNIQUES 22   1.9.1 WHEN IS DOWNSCALING NECESSARY 24   1.9.2 DYNAMICAL OR STATISTICAL DOWNSCALING 25  1.10 POST-PROCESSING TECHNIQUES 26   1.10.1 DELTA/SCALING METHOD (ALSO CALLED THE PERTURBATION METHOD) 27   1.10.2 BIAS CORRECTION 28  1.11  CLIMATE CHANGE SCENARIOS 29   1.11.1 REFERENCE PERIOD AND FUTURE HORIZONS 29   1.11.2 CONSTRUCTING CLIMATE SCENARIOS 30  CHAPTER TWO - CATEGORIZING CLIMATE INFORMATION 33 2.1 CLIMATE INFORMATION CATEGORIES 34  2.2 CLIMATE INFORMATION FORMATS 37    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  XI  CHAPTER THREE - CATALOGUE OF CLIMATE INFORMATION FORMATS  39 BASIC CATEGORY 41   1.  SYNTHESIS TABLE  43   2.  CLIMATE NORMALS 45   3.  HISTORICAL TRENDS 47   4.  MAPS OF DELTA CHANGES 49  INTERMEDIATE CATEGORY 51   1.  SPATIAL ANALOGUE 53   2.  SCATTER PLOT 55   3.  FUTURE VALUES 57   4.  EVOLUTION OF FUTURE VALUES 59   5.  CUMULATIVE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION 61  DETAILED CATEGORY 63   1.  TEMPORAL SERIES 65   2.  INTENSITY-DURATION-FREQUENCY CURVES (ANALYSIS OF EXTREMES)  67   3.  ANALYSIS OF LIMITED CONFIDENCE VARIABLES – THE CHOICE BETWEEN SYNTHETIC   SCENARIOS OR CLIMATE MODEL SCENARIOS 69  CHAPTER FOUR - DECISION MAKING USING CLIMATE INFORMATION 74  CHAPTER FIVE - CASE STUDIES OF CLIMATE INFORMATION USE IN ADAPTATION 77 BASIC INFORMATION 78  INTERMEDIATE INFORMATION 79  DETAILED INFORMATION 81  GLOSSARY 83 EXAMPLES 89 REFERENCES 91    XII  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Figure 1 |  Steps of a climate change adaptation framework.  3 Figure 2 |  Example of the natural variability in annual mean temperatures, as well as 10 and 30 year moving averages,    without the effect of a long-term trend (such as would be produced under a climate signal with increases in    GHG). 7 Figure 3 |  Time-series of annual temperature over Quebec, as simulated by the Canadian Regional Climate Model,    along with trend lines for a relatively A. short period and B. longer period that highlight the fact that short-   term trends may not reflect long-term climate change trends. 8 Figure 4 |  Interactions described by climate models (left panel) and an example of the discrete grids used to compart   mentalize the climate system (right panel).  9 Figure 5 |  Global temperature change relative to 1986-2005 for the SRES scenarios run by CMIP3 and the RCP   scenarios runby Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5, see section 1.6.1). The number of    models is given in brackets and the shading (coloured envelopes) represents all model results.  12 Figure 6 |  Timeline for the use of observed (pre-2005) and simulated CO2 (post 2005) concentrations in climate   simulation production available in the CMIP5 ensemble.  13 Figure 7 |  Time series of global annual mean surface air temperature anomalies (relative to 1986-2005) from CMIP5    concentration-given experiments. Projections are shown for each RCP for the multi-model mean (solid    lines) and the 5 to 95% rang (± 1.64 standard deviation) across the distribution of individual models    (shading). Discontinuities in 2100 are due to different numbers of models performing the extension runs    beyond 21st century and have no physical meaning. Only one ensemble member is used from each model    and numbers in the figure indicate the number of different models contributing to the different time    periods. No ranges are given for the RCP6.0 projections beyond 2100 as only two models are available.  15 Figure 8 |  Title as Figure 7. The red circle highlights the time period prior to 2050 where models run with all four RCPs    project similar changes in global surface temperatures.  18 Figure 9 |  Maximizing the coverage of precipitation, temperature and snow distributions with the lowest number of    simulations within a large ensemble.  20 Figure 10 |  Projected change in mean summer temperature (June, July and August) and mean winter temperature   (December, January and February). The changes are shown for an ensemble of GCMs under three RCPs   (2.6, 4.5 and 8.5). The elliptical lines indicate the 10th, 50th and 90th percent confidence intervals. The    scenarios close to the 10th, 50th and 90th percentile changes are circled in blue and highlighted with blue    arrows.  21 Figure 11 |  Example of the difference in grid cell size between a global climate models (left panel) with a resolution of    approximately 200 km and information that has been downscaled to a 45 km grid cell (right panel).  22 Figure 12 |  Comparison between dynamical and statistical downscaling techniques.  23 Figure 13 |  Example of delta/scaling post-processing technique. The relative change between A. the reference and    the future is first calculated and B. the change is then applied to the observed time-series. 27 Figure 14 |  Example of bias correction post-processing technique. The relative change between A. the reference and    the future is first calculated and B. the change is then applied to the entire simulated time-series. 28 Figure 15 |  Climate scenario construction done improperly A. by comparing future simulation values with past    observed values and done properly B. by comparing past and future simulated values. 31 Figure 16 |  Key criteria used to evaluate the climate information needs of decision-makers. 34 Figure 17 |  Decision tree to evaluate climate information needs  36 Figure 18 |  Climate normals of mean annual temperature (°C) for the reference period 1971-2000. The values are   calculated using Environment Canada station data that has been interpolated on a 10 km by 10 km grid    and made available through an NRCan database45-46 (see text). 45 Figure 19 |  Historic annual total precipitation (mm) time series for the period 1901-2005 for an Environment Canada    homogenized climatological station46. Trends for 1901-2005 and 1971-2005 are shown in blue and red,    respectively. 47 Figure 20|  Maps of delta changes 49  LIST OF FIGURES    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  XIII  Figure 21 |  Spatial analogue for the greater Toronto area for the 2080 horizon (2071-2100). A. The regions where    the recent climate (1971-2000) is similar to the climate projected for the greater Toronto area in 2080    (2071-2100). B. The regions where the projected future climate (2071- 2100) is similar to that of the    greater Toronto area for the recent past (1971-2000). The similitude categories indicate the level of    similarity between the observed climate and the projected climate for the region of interest (using 136    global climate simulations). The analogues are based on a statistical comparison between the current and    future distributions of mean annual temperature and total annual precipitation for the reference period    1971-2000 and the horizon 2080 (2071-2100).  53 Figure 22 |  Projected changes in mean temperature (°C) and total precipitation (%) for the provinces of New    Brunswick and Nova Scotia for the winter months (DJF, December, January, and February) for the horizon    2080 (2071-2100) in comparison to a 1971-2000 reference period. The changes are shown for an    ensemble of global climate simulations under RPC4.5 (n = 100, blue points) and RCP8.5 (n = 60, red    points). The associated distributions of each set of simulations are shown on the left and bottom panels.  55 Figure 23 |  Climatic normals in the number of freezing-degree days for the period 1971-2000 along with projected    future values for this index for the horizons 2050 (2046-2065) and 2090 (2081-2100), calculated using an    ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3 and 4 from CRCM4). The middle columns represent the    median, while the left and right columns represent the 10th and 90th percentiles of the ensemble,    respectively. 57 Figure 24 |  Left: Evolution of the mean annual number of growing degree-days for the years 1971-2100 for the    Greater Slave Lake region. The values are calculated using an ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3    and 4 from CRCM4), while the observations come from an NRCan dataset44,45. Right: The distributions    values of the regional mean for observed values (black curve) and projected values are shown as the 10th,    50th, and 90th percentiles of the ensemble of climate scenarios (green, blue, and red curves respectively).  59 Figure 25 |  Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the regional mean annual number of growing degree-days for    the reference period (1971-2000) and two future horizons (2050 and 2090) for the Greater Slave Lake    region. The values are calculated using an ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3 and 4 from    CRCM4), while the observations come from an NRCan dataset44,45. Shown are the observed values (black    curve) and projected values for the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the ensemble of climate scenarios    (green, blue and red curves). 61 Figure 26 |  A. Projected change in mean annual discharge (Qmean) for the 2041-2070 period in comparison with the    reference period 1971- 2000 using an ensemble of 89 CMIP3 simulations and B. mean annual hydrograph    for the reference and future periods for one of the sub-watersheds. 65 Figure 27 |  Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves for the St-Lawrence valley simulated for the present (aet) and future    (aeu) climate by the CRCM driven by a global climate model CGCM #4. The lines indicate the intensity for    events with four different fixed frequency return intervals (2, 5, 10, and 25 years).  67 Figure 28 |  Extent of flood zone as simulated by synthetic scenario 9, presented in Table 8 (QT100 + 2000m3/s).   71    XIV  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Table 1 |  Key characteristics of RCPs and similarities with SRES scenarios.   12 Table 2 |  The relative importance of the three sources of uncertainties in climate projections over time. 19 Table 3 |  Comparison of the advantages and limitations of both dynamical and statistical downscaling. 25 Table 4 |  Overview of three climate information categories, basic, intermediate, and detailed.  35 Table 5 |  Climate information formats associated with each of the three climate information categories.  40 Table 6 |  Summary of projected climate change for the province of British Columbia for the horizon 2050 (2041-2070)    in comparison to the reference period 1961-1990. Values are calculated using an ensemble of 30 global    climate model projections derived from 15 different GCMs each one using two SRES greenhouse gas    emissions scenarios (A2 and B1). 43 Table 7 |  Examples of climate indices or events with limited confidence  69 Table 8 |  List of nine what-if (synthetic) scenarios constructed to simulate changes in discharge along the Rivières-   des-Prairies, on the North shore of Montreal. Q2 and Q100 represent total annual discharges with a return    period of 2 years and 100 years, respectively.  71  LIST OF TABLES      INTRODUCTION     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  2  THE NEED FOR THIS GUIDE  Climate change has become an important concern around the globe and in order to adapt to its impacts, the  expected changes must first be understood. It can be argued that climate science has now reached a certain  level of maturity that renders it more valuable and useful for decision-makers. At the same time, however, the  potential impacts of climate change raise an increasing number of issues that decision-makers have to deal  with. Consequently, making decisions based on climate information is far from straightforward. Identifying  and obtaining the relevant information can be a challenge in and of itself but is one of many steps required  to develop an adaptation framework (Figure 1). These steps largely stem from guidelines outlined by the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in the early 1990s for impacts and adaptation studies1–3.  They have been described in a growing body of literature (e.g.4–8), however, most guides focused on impacts and  adaptation generally give very limited guidance regarding the various types of climate information available.  In this context, this guide aims to provide a tool that will help decision-makers better understand different  types of climate information and help them better identify how this information can be used at different stages  of the adaptation process. Knowledge exchange between climate service providers and users is increasingly  recognized as an important step in the decision making process9.  DEFINING ADAPTATION AND DECISION-MAKER  The term adaptation is used in this guide to refer to all processes, actions and strategies that allow individuals,  communities, and organizations to cope with, manage, and adjust to changing climatic conditions such that risks  are minimized and opportunities are seized10. Adaptation is therefore used in a broad sense and encompasses  a number of actions that are often separated into two categories11:     › In building adaptive capacity, which includes establishing systems for data collection and research, increasing    awareness, evaluating vulnerabilities and risks, supporting social structures as well as governance.   › In exploring adaptation outcomes, which includes initiating activities that reduce vulnerabilities or exploit    opportunities.  In concordance with the term adaptation, the term decision-maker is used in this guide to include all individuals  that partake in any one of the activities listed above. It therefore includes a wide range of users from those  starting a reflection on climate change to those ready to implement adaptation measures. It is important  to recognize that a given decision-maker may, over time, find himself at different stages of the adaptation  framework. For instance, decision-makers may consider or implement different decisions as their knowledge of  climate information increases or as conditions change. For example, a policy maker may first want to evaluate  the potential vulnerability of a city to climate change (Step 4 in Figure 1) and based on that first evaluation,  he/she may ultimately want to revise norms and policies to include specific adaptation measures (Steps 5  and 6 in Figure 1).  The diversity and availability of climate information have evolved over the years. However, climate information  is generally not exploited to its fullest potential. There are a few reasons for this. First, potential users of  climate information are numerous and will vary in their knowledge, objectives, capacities, authority and  responsibilities12. Consequently, recognizing what and how to use climate information may not always be  straightforward. In addition, their needs may require more specific information that must be customized to  some degree to suit their expertise. Indeed, ‘generic’ decision support tools are not easily constructed given  that climate related decisions are made at multiple levels and by a range of actors with varying capacities to  handle the information13,14. Finally, climate information must be communicated and transferred efficiently  and the optimal format used to convey the information may differ among users.    3  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  This guide will highlight the fact that climate information can be tailored to suit the needs of a variety of  users. With increased interactions between scientists and decision-makers, the gap between these two  groups is decreasing and ultimately, users should increase their understanding of the different types of  climate information and their usefulness while climate service providers should increase their understanding  of the diversity of climate information users. In other words, users must be aware that they may not always  need specific ‘decision-driven’ information, while climate service providers must be willing to better format  ‘science-driven’ information into something that the users can more readily incorporate into their studies.  More specifically, the guide will help identify what are the right tools for the right job.  Note that these steps are iterative. Users may find that they will need to go through some of the steps a number of times   STEP 1  › Build a team › Beging a dicussionon the issues or   activity sector to prioritize  STEP 2  › Describe the current system conditions › Describe the current stresses (climatic and   others) › Describe the adaptation capacity of the   system  STEP 3  › Understand the observations  › Understand climate simulations and   future projections  › Understand the uncertainties  STEP 4  › Identify the impacts and opportunities   linked to climate change › Identify the importance of non-climatic   factors  › Evaluate the vulnerability of the system  STEP 5  › Identify potential adaptation measures › Prioritize adaptation measures  STEP 6  › Identifiy actions to undertake in order to   adopt adaptation measures › Follow-up on impact of adaptation   measures › Adjust the plan as need be  Figure 1 |  Steps of a climate change adaptation framework.   Source: I. Charron (Ouranos)   The information presented in the guidebook are particularly useful to the completion of the third step, an  important stepping-stone to the identification of impacts and opportunities under a changing climate.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  4  What is climate information?  The term climate information is used in this document to refer to climate data that are obtained from  observations from meteorological stations or from climate models. The former provides information on  historical events while the latter can simulate both past and future periods. The focus of the guide is  largely on future climate information.   TARGET AUDIENCE   This guide is intended to be broad-reaching and written in a general fashion in order to help decision- makers from all sectors of activity faced with the task of evaluating the impacts of climate change and/or  of implementing adaptation measures. In other words, the guide targets an audience already invested in  climate change adaptation that is for example going through an adaptation process described in Figure 1. The  information presented will be particularly useful for users who have limited experience with climate information  and climate services. A better understanding of the available climate information will increase their ability to  evaluate their particular needs and to either prepare the information themselves or to communicate their  requirements to climate service providers.  Climate service providers will also benefit from the guide since it will help them better categorize demands  in terms of the use or purpose of the climate information and acquire a better sense of the different types  of climate formats that can be tailored according to user expertise. The latter is also true for those who  regularly use climate data and therefore understand climate science concepts well but must often find a way  to present their results to stakeholders who may not generally be as familiar with climate information.   OBJECTIVES   The overall objectives of this guidebook are to increase the capacity of decision-makers to understand climate  information and to incorporate this information in a decision-making framework.  The guide should, on one  hand, serve as a reminder to users to become more critical of the information that is given to them, and on  the other, it should also serve as a reminder to climate service providers to become more transparent about  the way in which climate information is produced.   HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE  This guidebook is meant to appeal to a wide range of users and therefore contains information with varying  levels of complexity. Consequently, many will not need to read the entire document. Rather, users may want  to focus their efforts on sections that are most relevant to them.  A few important points should guide the reader through this document:   › Part of the challenge for decision-makers in using climate information is often to understand the terminology    used by climate scientists. Many such concepts are addressed in Chapter 1 and are highlighted using bold    coloured font throughout the guide.    › The level of complexity of the climate information increases fairly rapidly with the progression through the    different figures and graphics presented in Chapter 3. It may therefore be helpful to evaluate one’s needs in    Chapter 2 and then use that information to focus on the associated climate information category in    Chapter 3.     5  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  6  CLIMATE MODEL CONCEPTS  CHAPTER ONE     7  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  1.1 NATURAL CLIMATE VARIABILITY  Figure 2 |  Example of the natural variability in annual mean temperatures, as well as 10 and 30 year moving averages,    without the effect of a long-term trend (such as would be produced under a climate signal with increases in    GHG).    Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)   The climate is not constant. While the weather  varies on a daily basis, climate captures variations  on all time scales, from one decade or century to the  next, and even on a seasonal and yearly basis (Figure  2). For example some winters are warmer than  others and annual precipitation is greater in some  years than others. These differences are referred to  as the natural variability in the climate, or climate  variability. Some of these natural fluctuations in  the climate are chaotic and unpredictable, while   others are caused by phenomena that are more or  less cyclic, and may occur at different time-scales.  Examples of factors that impact the response of  the climate include the solar cycle15, the role of the  stratosphere16, and the role of oceanic circulation  patterns17. Many such climatic phenomena that are  part of real world natural variability emerge from  climate model simulations but they often exhibit  different statistical properties.     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  8  This implies that, in order to pick up a clear climate  change signal (Figure 3), climate data must be  averaged over relatively long periods of time  (see Box on Climate normals). Given the natural  variability in the climate, it will still be possible with  climate change, to experience short terms trends  that are opposite to the overall projected trend  due to climate change. It is therefore important  to beware of trends that are calculated over a  relatively small number of years (Figure 3a).   1.2 CLIMATE CHANGE  Figure 3 |  Time-series of annual temperature over Quebec, as simulated by the Canadian Regional Climate Model,    along with trend lines for a relatively A. short period and B. longer period that highlight the fact that short-   term trends may not reflect long-term climate change trends.  Source: R. deElìa (Ouranos)   Climate normals  Climate normals are averages of climate indices used to represent the recent past climate for a given  area. The time period used for climate normals often corresponds to the time period used as a baseline  or reference period in climate change calculations. Note that climate normals should not be confused  with reference period. Climate normals are calculated using observed station data while reference  period values are calculated using outputs from simulations. Climate normals are calculated using  observations of temperature and precipitation that have been collected globally since the mid-19th  century (some stations have longer time series), along with other climate variables on a more selective  basis. To facilitate comparisons among studies, climate centers around the world tend to converge on  a similar 30-year timeframe to represent climate normals, which are endorsed by the WMO. However,  it is important to note that other sources of observations such as satellite data are available for much  shorter and more recent time periods. The particularities of the study undertaken by the decision-maker  can influence the baseline period chosen. What is important is that the reference or baseline period be  long enough to adequately characterize the long-term climatic conditions and not be overly influenced  by short-term variability. For example, a 10 year average could easily be influenced by a short-term  warming or cooling trend, whereas a 30 year average would likely smooth out much of this effect (as  seen in Figure 2).  A B  Climate change is a long-term continuous change,  an increasing or decreasing trend, in relation to  average baseline conditions. This change is strongly  modulated by the natural variability in the climate.  Figure 2 shows annual mean temperature data  plotted over time. Clearly, the annual temperature  is not constant but varies from year-to-year. This  natural variability will persist, even if the long-term  trend is for annual mean temperature to increase,  as shown in Figure 3.     9  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  the behaviour and interactions between the  atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere  and biosphere, under external forcings such as  solar radiation, aerosols, as well as natural and  anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions  (Figure 4).  1.3 CLIMATE MODELS   Figure 4 |  Interactions described by climate models (left panel) and an example of the discrete grids used to compart   mentalize the climate system (right panel).   Source: Ouranos   As the nature of the climatic system is non-linear  (chaotic), obtaining an exact analytical solution  of the mathematical equations over the entire  globe would require so many simplifications that  the solution would be too different from the real  system to be very useful. The way to minimize  these simplifications is to solve the system of  equations numerically with a supercomputer and  sophisticated numerical methods. In order to  obtain the most accurate representation of the  climate, these equations would ideally be solved  for every point of the atmosphere, oceans and  of the upper layer of the soil, but in practice this  is impossible. Instead, these components of the  climate system are divided into discrete boxes  or grid cells covering the planet (Figure 4, right  panel). The size of the grid cells, both horizontally  and vertically, determines the resolution of the  climate model. Thus, a climate model is a simulator  consisting of computer code that provides a  discrete representation (i.e. on a grid) in space  and time of the basic equations of fluid mechanics  solved using a numerical scheme.   Climate models are numerical tools based on  mathematical equations that aim to represent  processes of the climate system. These equations  are based on physical laws which govern fluid  mechanics, such as the laws of conservation of  mass, energy, and momentum. They describe   Numerous climate models have been developed  by different climate science centers around the  world. The models differ in a number of factors,  such as the choice of the numerical scheme, the  degree of simplification, the resolution of their  grid and the way in which they represent physical  phenomena that occur at scales finer than the one  resolved directly by the basic equations (known as  parameterization). Also, an important difference  among models comes from the geophysical  fields used to represent the soil textures and the  vegetation types and cover. These fields along  with the topography and the GHG concentration /  emission are needed as inputs in climate models.  Such differences imply that each model is unique  and will generate a slightly different outcome with  the same forcing data.     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  10  Regional Climate Models (RCMs): RCMs have  smaller domains that cover only a portion of the  planet. By focusing on a limited area of the globe,  it is possible to solve the climate model equations  over a finer horizontal resolution (45 km or less)  within a reasonable amount of time. In order to run  regional climate models, data from global climate  models must be integrated at their boundaries  (this can also be done using reanalyses; essentially  a technique that uses computer models to  combine historical data from various sources to  recreate the past climate). This procedure is called  driving a regional climate model.    Global Climate Models (GCMs): as the name  suggests, GCM calculation grids (domains) cover  the entire planet. Current GCMs typically have a  horizontal resolution around 200 km. GCMs are  divided into three main categories. The very first  GCM generation of models to be developed were  referred to as atmospheric general circulation  models (AGCM), and only included the atmosphere  portion of the climate system and its interaction  with the continental land surface. The second  generation of models, termed atmosphere-ocean  general circulation models (AOGCM), coupled the  atmosphere and land with physical ocean models.  The latest generation of models, known as Earth  system models (ESM), now include the addition of  biogeochemical interactions and cycles, as well as  changes in land cover (such as vegetation types).   Thus far, the carbon cycle has been implemented  in most ESMs and research is ongoing to include  other cycles.   Model Resolution   There is a tendency to believe that the finer the resolution over which the information is given, the more  adequate, usable or richer it is. As a result, there may be a desire to use regional climate models or  statistically downscaled data instead of the outputs from global climate models directly. Ultimately, the  choice of one type of data versus another resides in the evaluation of numerous factors, but it is important  to understand that increased model resolution does not guarantee a superior model performance for all  variables. Moreover, increased resolution (through the use of downscaling techniques for example) will  not necessarily yield more useful information to the decision-maker. However, higher resolution allows  for a finer representation of topographic features, which may be very important for some variables,  particularly those representing extreme events.   Climate models are divided into two main groups based on the size of their calculation grid, an area referred  to as the model domain:     11  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Emission scenario development is a process that  occurs in parallel with the development of climate  models. Teams of researchers are dedicated to  evaluating how emissions will evolve in the future  and these scenarios are then used to run climate  models in order to produce simulations of future  climate, each dependent upon a given emissions  scenario.  Concentrations of greenhouse gases are currently  being described using Representative Concentration  Pathways (RCPs). These emission scenarios were  the basis of the latest, Fifth Assessment Report  (AR5) published in 2013 by the IPCC19. RCPs contain  emission, concentration and land-use trajectories  and are meant to be representative of the current  literature on emissions and concentration of  greenhouse gases. The premise is that any single  RCP trajectory can result from a diverse range of  socioeconomic and technological development  scenarios. Future climate projections presented  in the third and fourth IPCC Assessment reports  were based on SRES scenarios (Table 1, Figure 5).    Four RCP families were developed and named  according to their total radiative forcing (in W/ m2) around 2100 (Table 1, Figure 5). They range  from RCP2.6, which assumes an eventual decline  in CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere during  the 21st century and projects the smallest changes  in global surface temperatures, to RCP8.5, which  is based on steadily increasing CO2 concentrations,  leading to the highest projected changes in  surface temperatures by 2100 and beyond (Table  1, Figure 5).  As discussed above, an important component  (forcing) of the climate is the emission of greenhouse  gases GHG), and consequently GHG forcing is  also an important component of the numerical  simulation of the climate. There are two sources  of data for these emissions. First, for the past,  emissions inputs come from observations made  at different stations around the globe. Second, for  the future, the evolution of greenhouse gases is  obtained from what are called emissions scenarios.    Emissions scenarios describe plausible future  releases of greenhouse gases, aerosols and other  anthropogenic gases into the atmosphere. They  are based on a coherent and internally consistent  set of assumptions about driving forces,  such  as technological change, demographic and  socioeconomic development, and their key  interactions (IPCC 200718). Many factors influence  future global emissions, the most important are  mitigation policies that can play an important role in  regulating anthropogenic emissions. Consequently,  levels of future emissions are uncertain and thus  these scenarios provide alternative visions of how  the future may unfold. The choice of the emission  scenario is responsible for a large proportion of  the uncertainty in climate projections, particularly  in the latter part of the 21st century (see  uncertainties). The range in the different emissions  scenarios reflects our current understanding and  knowledge about future socioeconomic and  technological developments that may or may not  be realized. As new knowledge becomes available  about these underlying assumptions, emissions  scenarios are revised and made available to the  scientific community.  1.4 EMISSIONS SCENARIOS  Emissions scenarios over time   Emissions scenarios over time: RCPs replaced an earlier set of emission scenarios, published in a Special  Report on Emissions Scenarios (IPCC 200020), hence known as the SRES scenarios. The SRES scenarios  were used as inputs to climate models for the IPCC Third and Fourth Assessment reports, published  in 2001 and 2007 respectively18,21. Table 1 and Figure 5 can be used to compare both sets of emissions  scenarios.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  12  Figure 5 |  Global temperature change relative to 1986-2005 for the SRES scenarios run by CMIP3 and the RCP    scenarios runby Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5, see section 1.6.1). The number of    models is given in brackets and the shading (coloured envelopes) represents all model results.   Adapted from Knutti and Sedláček (2012)23.   Adapted from Rogelj et al. 201222  *Note that SRES A1F1 was not used in the CMIP3 experiment and therefore does not appear on Figure 5 below.  However, if it was shown, it would appear above SRES A2.  Table 1 |  Key characteristics of RCPs and similarities with SRES scenarios.    Name Radiative forcing CO2  equivalent   (ppm)  Temp anomaly  (°C)  Pathway SRES temp  anomaly   equivalent  RCP8.5 8.5 W/m2 in 2100 >1370 4.9 Rising SRES A1FI*  RCP6.0 6 W/m2 post 2100 ~850 3.0 Stabilizing without overshoot SRES B2  RCP4.5 4.5 W/m2 post 2100 ~650 2.4 Stabilizing without overshoot SRES B1  RCP2.6  (RCP3PD)  3W/m2 mid-century,  decline to 2.6Wm2 by  2100  ~490 1.5 Peak and decline None    13  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  available until the present day, stop being used in  2005?  The decision on the last ‘past’ year is made  by the climate community and reflects the time  needed for climate scientists to produce climate  simulations, publish their results in peer-reviewed  scientific literature, and to write the chapters of the  IPCC report. These processes are all time consuming  endeavors and simply cannot be accomplished in  one year.   The definition of the ‘past period’ for which  observed GHG emissions are available and used to  drive climate models is updated with each new IPCC  assessment. For the most recent, Fifth Assessment  Report, observations of GHG were used until 2005,  after which emissions scenarios were used as inputs  (see black vertical lines on Figure 5, Figure 6). Given  that the IPCC report was published in 2013, one  could question why the observations, which are   Figure 6 |  Timeline for the use of observed (pre-2005) and simulated CO2 (post 2005) concentrations in climate simulation    production available in the CMIP5 ensemble.   Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  14  The time span of a simulation can range from a  few years to thousands of years, both for the past  and future periods (Figure 7). The length of time  over which climate models are run to produce  simulations differs from one climate center to  another but can range for example from 1850  or 1900 to 2100 or even 2300 (see example of  Figure 7). Each simulation is computed iteratively  at different time intervals. These intervals, also  called time steps, indicate the time period within  the model between two states of the climate  system as simulated by solving the equations.  The length of the time step defines the temporal  resolution, which is typically 5 to 20 minutes.  At  each time step and at each point on the calculation  grid (horizontal and vertical level), the numerical  solution of the equations gives the values of  the variables included in the basic equations,  along with several others derived from physical  parameterizations. Thus, a climate simulation  contains more than one hundred descriptive  climate variables (temperature, winds, barometric  pressure, rainfall, snow, etc.), which should all be  physically consistent with one another from one  point on the grid to another and also in time.    Climate simulations are the end product of climate  models. They represent the result of running a  climate model and thus solving the equations that  are represented in a model, for a certain period of  time. As discussed earlier, each climate model has  its own set of equations to represent the climate  system. To obtain a climate simulation, many  different inputs are required in a climate model,  such as a detailed portrait of the Earth’s surface  including geophysical data (soil types, types of  vegetation, continental contours, location and  bathymetry of large bodies of water, description  of the topography, etc.). In addition, as addressed  previously, emission scenarios are a main driver to  climate models in climate change studies. Different  climate simulations are obtained as each climate  model responds differently to greenhouse gas  emissions scenarios, and hence will produce a  different future climate (also see Box on Members).  It is important to understand that none of these  future climates should be considered a prediction:  all the future climates projected by different climate  models with different GHG forcing scenarios should  be considered equally plausible.   Model Bias  Climate models are a representation of the real climate system and the mathematical equations that are  solved to represent this system are a simplification of the real world. A climate simulation is therefore an  imperfect numerical representation of the meteorology that could have occurred over the globe, based  on the assumption that the simulation of the natural variability is close to the real one. This means that  even if we have observations of greenhouse gases emissions for the past and we run a climate model  using those observations as input, the resulting simulation will give a response that is different from what  is recorded at meteorological stations.   Furthermore, due to the chaotic nature of the climate system and climate model sensitivity to things  such as initial conditions at the start of a simulation, even a “perfect” climate model would not reproduce  the succession or timing of observed historical meteorological events, and the best we can expect is  that the model reproduces the statistical properties (mean, variance, inter-annual variability, etc.) of  the observed records.  Given that each model represents the climate system differently and imperfectly,  they each have their own particular bias. This will mean for example, that some models may always yield  temperatures that are slightly colder on average than the other models, while some may always project  more precipitation than others. . Furthermore, a model’s bias is not necessarily equal for all parts of the  globe, and can vary for different regions. It is important to consider this bias when calculating climate  change scenarios. Biases are present in both GCMs and RCMs, and in gridded observations.  1.5 CLIMATE SIMULATIONS    15  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Figure 7 |  Time series of global annual mean surface air temperature anomalies (relative to 1986-2005) from    CMIP5 concentration-given experiments. Projections are shown for each RCP for the multi-model mean    (solid lines) and the 5 to 95% rang (± 1.64 standard deviation) across the distribution of individual models    (shading). Discontinuities in 2100 are due to different numbers of models performing the extension runs    beyond 21st century and have no physical meaning. Only one ensemble member is used from each model    and numbers in the figure indicate the number of different models contributing to the different time periods.    No ranges are given for the RCP6.0 projections beyond 2100 as only two models are available.   Source: IPCC 201319    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  16  Climate projections are the portions of a simulation  that represent the future (Figure 7). They therefore  represent the plausible evolution of different  climate variables that describe the climate system  over several decades to centuries under different   Ensemble members  It is possible to produce a large ensemble of simulations, or of plausible climate outcomes by running  numerous models with different emissions scenarios. A model can also be run multiple times with the  same RCP with slight perturbations in the initial conditions, for example by changing the start date of the  simulation to obtain what are called ensemble members. Because of the chaotic nature of the climate  system, these small changes will yield different responses (succession of meteorological events) and thus  slightly different climate projection values.    1.6 CLIMATE PROJECTIONS emissions scenarios. The first year of this future  period is the year that corresponds to the first year  when emissions scenarios are used to run climate  models changes, as opposed to observed GHG  emissions.     17  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  As discussed above, there are numerous  climate modeling centers around the world,  each developing their own climate model and  there are currently four plausible emissions  scenarios to consider when producing climate  simulations. Obtaining such a simulation, i.e.  running one model with one RCP for example, is  computationally intensive and even with today’s  high performance super computers, it can take  up to several months to run a global model over  the entire globe for a meaningful simulation  period, say 1850 to 2100. Consequently, it would  be impractical, if not impossible, for each climate  modeling center to run all available models with  all available RCPs. Therefore, to obtain a common  frame of simulations and the largest possible  ensemble, the modeling centers have agreed to  run their own models with the different RCPs and  to make the resulting simulations available to the  rest of the climate community. This collaboration  is done through an initiative called the Coupled  Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP). Through a  web interface, it is possible to download different  simulations from different modeling centers that  are part of this project in order to obtain a large  ensemble of simulations. The CMIP ensemble  forms the backbone of the results presented in  the IPCC reports.  As models and emissions scenarios are updated,  so is the collection of simulations, also known  as the ensemble, made available through CMIP.  Currently, the scientific community is using the fifth  ensemble, called CMIP5. This newest generation of  participating models are run using the RCPs whereas  simulations made available from the previous  CMIP3 used the SRES scenarios. CMIP5 simulations   CMIP5 vs CMIP3  It is generally believed that recent climate model simulations are likely to be more reliable than those  of an earlier generation of models (vintage). They are, after all, based on more recent knowledge and  incorporate more processes and feedbacks. However, the differences between the two vintages are  not always very distinct. Consequently, information provided with an older vintage remains valid when  a new vintage is produced. Indeed, impacts studies conducted with an older ensemble should not  be automatically disregarded when new simulations are made available. As such, the information in  this guide is often based on the newest generation of models (from the CMIP5 ensemble), but older  simulations (from the CMIP3 ensemble) are also presented in some cases. The focus of the guide is on  the interpretation of the climate information, and hence depends very little on the particular generation  of models or scenarios that were used.   1.6.1 COUPLED MODEL INTERCOMPARAISON PROJECT (CMIP) are generally executed at a higher spatial resolution  and the models typically have a more complete  representation of physical parameterizations  (particularly of biophysical processes such as the  carbon-cycle) than their predecessors. It is generally  expected that the new generation of models will  provide a better representation of the climate;  however, not all models have evolved equally24. It  is worth mentioning that this development process  is always on-going. Climate centers are currently  developing a CMIP6 ensemble, which will be the  basis of the next IPCC report.  Comparisons of projected future outputs between  the two generations of simulations are not  straightforward because the two ensembles used  two different sets of GHG scenarios. Nonetheless,  recent studies have shown that comparisons of  model means of temperature and precipitation  change are similar in CMIP3 and CMIP5 for  climate projections with similar forcing25. Yet, the  CMIP5 ensemble compares more favourably with  observations for past climate simulations (23,26–28).  These conclusions should reassure users that  climate information provided using CMIP3 models  remains valid and robust even if there is now a  gradual shift towards use of CMIP5 model results.  The conclusions also support the argument that an  ensemble of models should be used when making  decisions, as it has been shown that any single  model chosen from the ensemble scores lower than  the entire ensemble when multiple variables are  validated against observations29. In other words,  the mean of the simulation ensemble for the past  climate is generally closer to the observed values  than any given individual simulation.     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  18  important since this variability can be in opposition,  at least for a few decades, to the longer-term trends  that are associated with anthropogenic climate  change (Figure 3). It may take several decades  before the climate ‘signal’ emerges from the ‘noise’  of year-to-year variability. Consequently, over short  time scales, the choice of the emissions scenarios  is relatively unimportant (red circle, Figure 8). This  is perhaps surprising but it takes approximately 30  years for any difference between current emissions  scenarios to have an appreciable impact on the  climate3,31. For example, on Figure 8, one can notice  that the coloured line start to diverge around 2030  and that a clearer distinction can be made among  the different scenarios by 2050.   However, over longer time horizons, the choice  of the emission scenario becomes very important  (coloured envelopes on Figure 8), while the model  uncertainty remains fairly large irrespective of  the timescale over which decisions are made.  These patterns have been shown to be consistent  for both global and regional analysis of the  uncertainties30,32–35.    Climate projection uncertainties stem from three  main sources: natural variability in the climate,  climate model structural inaccuracies, and the  future trajectories of greenhouse gas emissions30–32.  As seen previously, the evolution of the climate  is influenced by important unpredictable natural  fluctuations that occur even without any change in  greenhouse gases concentration. In addition, the  models are simulating their own climate, which  differs from reality (more or less, depending on the  model, see Box on Model Bias) and each models  can differ to a certain degree in its response to  greenhouse gas emissions.  Finally, the evolution  of greenhouse gas emissions is also uncertain and  it is not possible at this time, to determine which,  if any, of the four RCP trajectories will be realized.   The relative importance of each source of  uncertainty depends on the timescale considered.  Over a timescale of a few decades, the natural  variability in the climate is the most important  source of uncertainty and can even hide the climate  change signal over the short term. This is extremely   Figure 8 |  Title as Figure 7. The red circle highlights the time period prior to 2050 where models run with all four RCPs    project similar changes in global surface temperatures.   Source: IPCC 201319  1.7 SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN CLIMATE PROJECTIONS    19  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  What is important is to understand what the main  sources of uncertainty are and how their relative  importance changes over time. Within a decision- making framework, the timescale of the planning  horizon must be considered in order to weigh the  importance of the different sources of uncertainty  (Table 2). The planning horizon will also greatly  impact the type of climate information that would  be most appropriate.   In many cases, stakeholders already make decisions  in the face of some uncertainty since they have to  manage variability in local weather and climate  over the short-term, as well as uncertainties  in many other areas of their workflows and  decision-making. Consequently, the uncertainty  in climate projections need not be a deterrent  from making decisions over a longer time scale.   Table 2 |  The relative importance of the three sources of uncertainties in climate projections over time.  Over a near-term planning horizon, decision- makers may want to give greater importance to  the natural variability in the observations over the  region of interest, while keeping in mind that the  underlying climate change signal is still relevant  because it will have impact over the long term.  In other words, even for short-term objectives,  a long-term vision is necessary. The importance  of relying on an iterative process of revisiting  climate projections and re-evaluating adaptation  measures put into place, as recommended by  an adaptation framework, may be particularly  beneficial here (Figure 1).   Planning horizon Relative importance of sources of uncertainties Key source to   consider for  decision-makingNatural variability Emissions scenario Climate model  Short term   (<30 years) *** * ** Natural variability  Medium term   (30-50 years) * ** **  Emissions scenario  and climate model  Long term   (>50 years) * *** ** Emissions scenario  On the other hand, for longer planning horizons,  the uncertainties related to the emissions  scenario should be given particular consideration.  Over these horizons, the climate change signal is  stronger than the variability in the climate but it  is heavily influenced by which emission scenario  is chosen. Given the high level of uncertainty  associated with the evolution of anthropogenic  greenhouse gas emissions, decisions should  consider all plausible futures.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  20  on as many simulations that represent as many  models and emission scenarios as possible36 but the  term «large ensemble» remains vague. Ultimately,  the choice of the number of simulations to be  considered for a given project will be influenced  by the time and resources available. The expertise  of a climate service provider may prove valuable in  helping the decision-maker choose an appropriate  number.  Different statistical techniques can serve to select a  limited number of simulations that best represent  the properties of the entire available simulation  ensemble. The goal is to ensure that the chosen  simulations adequately represent the full range  of possible future conditions of the indices of  interest37.   One such technique is a cluster analysis38. Briefly,  this method consists of first selecting the climate  variables that are of interest for a particular  project. Next, for each simulation, the variables  are computed for the reference period and for the  future horizon and the difference between the  two values is calculated (i.e. the climatic change).  The differences are then standardized and an  algorithm can be used to calculate the distances  between all the simulations in a multi-dimensional  space (the dimensions correspond to the climate  variables chosen). Figure 9 illustrates an example,  and highlights the outcome of maximizing the  range in the response (i.e. the uncertainty) while  minimizing the number of simulations chosen. The  figure shows the number of simulations needed  to adequately cover the range of the simulation  ensemble for three climatic variables, namely   Users of climate information often express the  desire to be provided with the «best» future  scenario or the one that is most likely to be the  «true» scenario. However, it is not possible for  climate service providers to pick such a climate  change scenario. The reasons why this cannot be  done reside in the intrinsic properties of climate  models, climate simulation, and the emissions  scenarios outlined above. All together, they  provide a plausible representation of what the  real world is and of what the climate may become  given the current state of knowledge. State-of- the-art climate models provide a sophisticated but  imperfect representation of the real world climatic  system. It is very difficult to test which model is  the best as they all possess different strengths and  weaknesses. As stated previously, models have  biases and therefore produce slightly different  results. There is no climate model that is always  able to give the best results for all variables for all  seasons over all regions.  Furthermore, it is not  possible to determine at this time which scenario  of future greenhouse gas emissions will be closest  to reality.   Therefore, when providing climate information, the  most prudent advice is to consider a simulation  ensemble, or a large number of simulations in the  decision-making process. In other words, it is best  to take into account an ensemble that includes both  the best and worst case scenarios.    However, deciding on the exact number  of simulations that should be used is not  straightforward. Indeed, general guidelines suggest  that users should obtain climate projections based   Figure 9 |  Maximizing the coverage of precipitation, temperature and snow distributions with the lowest number of    simulations within a large ensemble.   Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)   1.8 SIMULATION ENSEMBLE    21  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  winter temperature, precipitation and snow cover.  The analysis reveals that selecting 12 simulations  out of a possible 86 allows a good representation  of the range.   Moreover, some input from users and climate  service providers can help the selection process in  some cases37. For example, some planning exercises  may warrant the need to focus on evaluating worst  case scenarios (which could imply only considering   Figure 10 |  Projected change in mean summer temperature (June, July and August) and mean winter    temperature (December, January and February). The changes are shown for an ensemble of GCMs   under three RCPs (2.6, 4.5 and 8.5). The elliptical lines indicate the 10th, 50th and 90th percent confidence    intervals. The scenarios close to the 10th, 50th and 90th percentile changes are circled in blue and    highlighted with blue arrows.   Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)   Limitations of selection   An important point to remember is that selections of a few representative simulations out of a range  of available outputs are invariably based on a limited number of climate indices over a given temporal  window (annual temperature and precipitation for example). They may therefore not be representative  of other indices over different temporal timescales (monthly snow cover for example). In other words,  the selection is only valid for the indices and timescales that were used to choose the scenarios in the  first place.   models run with RCP 8.5).  A method that is often  adopted by users is to select a «low», «median»  and «high» climate change scenario that will  adequately cover the range of all the simulations  that are available. Figure 10 highlights an example  of this technique, where the temperature and  precipitation outputs are used to select the  scenarios that are closest to the 10th, 50th and 90th  percentile changes out of the available simulations.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  22  GCMs simulate the evolution of the climate system  over the entire planet, with a horizontal resolution  of around one hundred to three hundred kilometres  (left panel on Figure 11), for periods that can reach  thousands of years. The calculation time required  to simulate the global climate of required length at   Figure 11 |  Example of the difference in grid cell size between a global climate models (left panel) with a resolution of    approximately 200 km and information that has been downscaled to a 45 km grid cell (right panel).   Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)    1.9 DOWNSCALING TECHNIQUES a finer resolution of a few kilometres, or even finer,  is generally not within the reach of even today’s  fastest computers. However, there is an increasing  demand by the user community to obtain climate  projections at a finer scale (right panel on Figure  11).     23  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Statistical downscaling: This approach is based on  the premise that the characteristics of local observed  climate can be derived from a series of large-scale  global climate variables (predictors). It can involve  various techniques (multiple regressions, stochastic  generators, neural networks), which are used to  establish statistical relationships between observed  local conditions and predictors obtained using data  from the recent climate (e.g. 1971-2000). The  statistical downscaling of a GCM simulation relies  on the hypothesis that the statistical relationships  established for the recent past will remain the same  for the future. In the context of climate change,  this hypothesis is problematic because climate is  not stationary and the validity of the assumption  is difficult to test. Moreover, downscaling several  climate variables simultaneously still presents  a challenge. Consequently, climate variables  are often processed separately, resulting in a  possible decline of spatiotemporal consistency.  Nonetheless, statistical downscaling is a relatively  inexpensive and quick approach compared to  dynamical downscaling. It is important to mention  that statistical downscaling may also be applied to  already higher resolution RCM data.   Dynamical downscaling: This approach relies on the  use of regional climate models (RCMs) which, like  the GCMs, are based on a realistic representation  of the physical laws that affect the climate system.  Such models are used to refine the horizontal  resolution of the climate in a selected region of  the globe. Their finer spatial resolution (typically 10  to 50 km) means they can develop more detailed  characteristics of climate because they benefit from  a much more precise representation of land surface  features (such as mountains, coastal contours, or  the presence of lakes and rivers). To stay linked  with the global climate, an RCM has to be supplied  at its periphery with large-scale variables from a  driving model, which is generally a GCM. Although  costly in terms of computing time, this downscaling  technique ensures consistency in time and space of  climate variables. In addition, climate models like  RCMs and GCMs have the capacity to simulate the  interactions among greenhouse gases and aerosols  with other components of the climate system,  which will improve their capacity to reproduce the  climate system.  Figure 12 |  Comparison between dynamical and statistical downscaling techniques.   Source: Ouranos  Techniques to produce climate information at a finer resolution, referred to as downscaling techniques (Figure  12) fall into two categories, namely dynamical and statistical downscaling (see39).     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  24  Downscaling and bias correction (post-processing)  There is often some confusion in separating downscaling and bias correction concepts. Bias correction  techniques are part of what are often referred to as post-processing techniques (see next section) and  are not, strictly speaking, related to downscaling techniques. However, many statistical downscaling  methods often involve a bias-correction step. In addition, while dynamical downscaling in and of itself  does not involve any form of bias correction, the outputs from regional climate models are at times bias  corrected. Hence, users often wrongly assume that bias correction and downscaling are one and the  same.   The idea that finer resolution climate data is better  can be attractive; however, downscaling will not  necessarily yield more useful information to  the decision-maker. Moreover, increased model  resolution does not guarantee superior model  performance for all variables and all time-scales.  Arguably, many adaptation strategies will be  developed for a relatively small area (local scale),  which may therefore require finer resolution  climate information. However, the mean change  projected from a GCM over a 200 km grid cell may  not be very different from what is projected once  the data are downscaled to a smaller grid cell  (from either dynamical or statistical downscaling),  particularly given the uncertainties around the  model ensemble projections. In other words,  downscaling may improve the accuracy of some  of the information given, but not for all variables  over all time periods.   1.9.1 WHEN IS DOWNSCALING NECESSARY Before deciding on the necessity and added- value of downscaled information, the climate  variable of interest and the landscape features of  the region of interest must be analyzed. Surface  characteristics like topography, coastlines or the  vicinity of a body of water do not have the same  effect on the various climate variables and this  influence could also vary from one season to  another. For instance, air surface temperature  is generally uniform over larger regions of flat  terrain, but changes abruptly by the seashore.  On the other hand, precipitation generally tends  to be more variable in space. Thus, in the latter  case, the choice of reverting to a dynamical  downscaling technique may be preferable but it  might not be necessary for someone interested in  the temperature over a large region. In addition,  the added time needed to resolve the information  at a finer scale is non-negligible and should  be accounted for (in deciding if downscaling is  necessary).     25  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  variables for shorter term projections but the  uncertainty is greater for projections for the end  of the century.  Finally, the number of global climate model  simulations far outweighs the number of  regional climate model simulations that have  currently been produced over North America.  Consequently, a much larger number of  projections can be provided by statistically  downscaling GCM simulation results. If a large  ensemble of projections is important to the study  at hand, then statistical downscaling could be the  preferred choice. If, on the other hand, a smaller –  but carefully chosen –simulation sample suffices,  then dynamical downscaling could be used.   The factors listed above highlight the complexity  in choosing, first whether to downscale at all, and  second, which method to use. There is not a sole  correct answer here and ultimately the selection  will depend on the objectives and resources of the  project.   The choice of downscaling method to use is not a  simple one. There are a number of factors (listed  in Table 3) that must be considered by climate  service providers in deciding which method to  use. First, with statistical downscaling techniques,  each climate variable is generally treated  individually, which may result in the physical  coherence between the variables being broken. In  other words, the mathematical representation of  the physics behind the climate that are present in  a global climate model may no longer hold true.  Some climate variables may be more sensitive  than others to this issue.   In addition, statistical downscaling is based  on statistical relationships between the local  observations of a variable of interest and other  coarser resolution climate variables used as  predictors. Adequate local observations from  meteorological stations are therefore necessary.  In addition, these statistical relationships are  assumed to be constant (or stationary) over time  which may not be true in a changing climate. This  assumption may not be too problematic for some   Dynamical    › Reproduces more detailed characteristics    of the climate    › Consistency in time and space among    variables   › More costly and longer to produce   › Small number of regional climate    simulations available   › More variables (wind, soil moisture, etc.)  Statistical    › Assumes that past relationships hold    true in the future   › Decline in spatiotemporal consistency    (one variable at a time)   › Quicker and less expensive to produce    › Large number of global simulations    available   › Dependent on observations (more    difficult for certain variables)  Table 3 |  Comparison of the advantages and limitations of both dynamical and statistical downscaling.  1.9.2 DYNAMICAL OR STATISTICAL DOWNSCALING    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  26  There is a large number of post-processing  techniques available and it is far beyond the scope  of this guidebook to review them in detail40,41.  However, two simple methods are presented as  examples to highlight the main objectives and  general methodologies of post-processing methods.   Note that the main assumption made with post- processing is that biases are (almost) identical  for the reference period and the future period,  which may not be the case. In addition, as  mentioned previously post-processing can be  used independently from, or in combination with  downscaling techniques, which often results in  some confusion between the two concepts.    An important warning regarding post-processing  technique must be raised. These techniques  strongly rely on the observation network, and thus  the only variables that can be post-processed are  those for which observations are available. In places  such as the USA, or much of Europe, the high- density network generally provides a sufficiently  high number of climate stations in different types  of location, with the possible exclusion of high  mountains, to build an adequate observational  dataset for some variables, namely temperature  and / or precipitation. In Canada, particularly  in the north, the station density is very low and  strongly biased as most of the stations are located  along the coastline and in valleys. Meteorological  stations are also very far from one another. Such a  coarse representation of reality is also present in  gridded observational datasets, which are created  from the interpolation of station data to fill regions  where there are none. The bottom line is that post- processing is only as good as the observations that  are used to conduct it, and given the limitations just  outlined here, caution is often advised.  As discussed previously, climate models (both GCMs  and RCMs) are mathematical representations of the  real world and often present a bias in their estimate  of climate variables. This is one of the main reasons  why climate simulations should never be compared  directly with observations.   These differences with real-world values often mean  that model outputs are rarely used «as-is» without  some sort of post-processing. This post-processing  step is often required in order to transform raw,  or even downscaled, climate model outputs into  climate information that is better suited for users.   Model bias is not an issue (and therefore does not  need to be corrected) when simply calculating the  relative changes between a future horizon and  the reference horizon from the same simulation  (i.e. coming from the same model with the same  emissions scenario). Indeed, the bias in the models  is generally assumed to be the same in the reference  and future simulated data and it therefore cancelled  out when calculating the relative change, or the  delta, between the two periods.   However, post-processing becomes necessary  when calculating future simulated values, in  other words when applying the change projected  by the model to the observations, the biases  become relevant and must be corrected. This  is particularly important for threshold values,  which are highly susceptible to small changes. For  example, if a model has a warm bias compared to  the observations, the likelihood of reaching a warm  temperature threshold (for example days with an  average temperature above 30°C) will be amplified  in the simulated data compared to the real world.  Consequently, if the bias is not removed, a decision- maker might conclude that, in the future, there will  be more days with an average temperature above  30°C, when this is in fact simply an artifact of the  model bias.  1.10 POST-PROCESSING TECHNIQUES    27  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  of observations or by using the corresponding quantiles  of the distribution (e.g.42 for an example of quantile  mapping technique). The latter allows for a different  correction factor to be applied to the distribution tails,  so that it is possible to change the extremes of the  distribution differently than the rest of the distribution.  An important point here is that this technique is applied  to specific time horizons (such as 30-year periods), not  to the entire time-series.   This method involves a perturbation of the observed  climate data based on the relative change between the  simulated reference and simulated future periods within  a given simulation. The relative change between the  reference and the future is first calculated (Figure 13a)  and the change (or delta) is then applied to the observed  time-series (Figure 13b).   This method can be done using two approaches, namely  by calculating a mean change over the entire distribution   Figure 13 |  Example of delta/scaling post-processing technique. The relative change between A. the reference and the    future is first calculated and B. the change is then applied to the observed time-series.  Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)    A  B  1.10.1 DELTA/SCALING METHOD (ALSO CALLED THE PERTURBATION METHOD)    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  28  applied to the entire simulated series (Figure 14b).  As for the perturbation method, a bias correction  can be based on a mean correction or on quantiles.  However, unlike the perturbation method where  the correction is done for a given time horizon, this  method allows for the bias to be removed from the  entire simulated time-series.    This method involves an adjustment or correction  of the entire simulated time-series (reference and  future periods) using a bias or correction factor  such that differences between the simulated  reference period data and the observations are  reduced. The correction factor is first calculated  by comparing the simulated reference period and  the observed data over the same time period, such  as 1961-1990 (Figure 14a). The correction is then   Figure 14 |  Example of bias correction post-processing technique. The relative change between A. the reference and    the future is first calculated and B. the change is then applied to the entire simulated time-series.  Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)    1.10.2 BIAS CORRECTION  A  B    29  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS   › Climate model scenarios are constructed    using climate data output from climate models    that simulate the future response of the climate    to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations;   › Analogue scenarios are constructed by    identifying recorded climate regimes that    resemble the future climate of a given region;   › Synthetic scenarios are produced by varying    a particular climate variable by a realistic but    arbitrary amount to obtain probable futures.  Climate scenarios are plausible and simplified  representations of the future climate, constructed  from climate simulations. They represent the  difference between the current climate and a future  climate. In essence, they represent a more tailored  product than climate model outputs (where the  time steps are minutes long). Climate scenarios give  the portrait of the future by averaging the outputs  of the simulations into a temporal resolution that  is better suited for impact studies (over years or  seasons for example). They are arguably the climate  information product most often used to evaluate  the potential impacts and consequences of our  changing climate.   Climate scenarios are generally grouped into the  following classes3:   1.11 CLIMATE CHANGE SCENARIOS  1.11.1 REFERENCE PERIOD AND FUTURE HORIZONS Climate change scenarios compare the average  climate between a past period, referred to as the  reference period or horizon, and a future horizon.  Given that inter-annual variability can remain  important in the future, the length of the reference  and future periods must be relatively long to  detect clear projected climate change trends. Two  main periods are used, one is a 30-year average,  for which the reference horizon corresponds to  the same timescale as the one used to calculate  climate normals (WMO standards). Note however  that an important distinction must be made here  with climate normals, which are calculated from  observations and the data over the reference  period, which comes from climate simulations.    Averages may also be calculated over 20-year time  periods, as is the case in most IPCC reports.    The future horizons will follow the time period for  the reference period, meaning that if the reference  period used is 30-years then the future horizons  will also be 30-years.  The time periods used as reference and future  horizons are used by climate research organisations  and are revised every decade. For example, a few  years ago, the reference period used by the WMO  was 1971 to 2000, while it is now 1981-2010 (the  AR5 from the IPCC uses 1986 to 2005).     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  30  As an example, Figure 15 presents an example  of a climate simulation (red line) that produces  values that are higher than the true observations  (black line) over the 1961-1990. In other words,  this simulation is warm-biased. Consequently,  if a comparison is made between the simulated  future values and the observations (top panel),  the projected change is inflated (6˚C in this case).  On the other hand, if the projected change is  calculated using simulated future and simulated  past values (bottom panel), the resulting change  is smaller (3˚C) as the warm bias in the simulation  is removed. Given that each simulation yields  slight different results, the only way to insure that  the projected changes are not artifacts of biases,  is to calculate deltas within each simulation  and not with the observations (and not among  simulations).  1.11.2 CONSTRUCTING CLIMATE SCENARIOS One of the most important ‘best-practice’ messages  to remember when producing or using climate  scenarios is that they are constructed from climate  simulations only and consequently, they compare  values simulated for the past (reference period) with  values simulated for the future (future horizon).  These comparisons are made within each individual  simulation.   Climate projections should NEVER be compared  directly with observations. The reason climate  model outputs or simulations cannot be compared  directly with observations is that climate model  results (i.e. simulations) are always slightly  different (as seen in section 1.10), or biased  compared to true observations (see Figure 15)  and never reproduce the observations perfectly. In  addition, for precipitation, model projections are  simulating the total amount of precipitation that  would be moved around the atmosphere and fall  over the entire grid cell while the observation is  only measuring the finite amount that fall on the  sensor at a particular station location.     31  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Figure 15 |  Climate scenario construction done improperly A. by comparing future simulation values with past observed    values and done properly B. by comparing past and future simulated values.  Source: T. Logan (Ouranos)   It is important to remember that post-processing  techniques (see section 1.10) are often used to re- move some of the bias in climate simulations in  order to better match simulation values to true   observed values. However, the match is never  perfect and so climate scenarios should still be  calculated using simulated past and future values,  even if simulations have been bias corrected.   A  B      CATEGORIZING CLIMATE INFORMATION CHAPTER TWO     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  34  Categories and user type  Climate information categories do not reflect a type of decision-maker but rather reflect the reason  why the information is required, and the specifics of the climate data itself.  This implies that users that  may be very familiar with climate information may, at times, only require basic information, while users  unfamiliar with climate information may require detailed information.   Part of the challenge in incorporating climate information into an adaptation framework or into a decision- making process is deciding what type of climate information is needed. Indeed, while the previous chapter  explained many of the underlying climate science concepts, it is just as important for a decision-maker to  understand the various climate information products that can be used to deliver that information.     In order to familiarize decision-makers with climate information and its different uses, this chapter presents a  simple categorization framework that divides climate information into three levels: basic, intermediate, and  detailed information. The choice of the most appropriate climate information is often made in collaboration  with climate service providers. The goal here is to help decision-makers better evaluate their climate  information needs.  Two main concepts are addressed here: climate information categories, which reflect the climate data  needed and climate information formats, which reflect the way the data is presented.  2.1 CLIMATE INFORMATION CATEGORIES Climate information categories represent the climate data or climate information; namely the climate variable,  the horizon, and the resolution of the model, which is provided to the user. The categories are based on a  few key criteria that are specifically related to the type of climate information that is required. These criteria  are shown in Figure 16. The categories are meant to separate climate information into three very broad  complexity levels, from information that is fairly simple to prepare and understand to information that is  more complex to produce and often more difficult to understand and where the uncertainties are more important.  Figure 16 |  Key criteria used to evaluate the climate information needs of decision-makers (adapted from Lu 200643).    35  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  It is important to note that all criteria presented in Figure 16 can be equally important in influencing the  classification outcome. Thus, it is possible that evaluating the impacts of climate change (which is an example  of evaluating the purpose of the information) on a given species is not automatically part of the intermediate  needs category, as it will also depend, for example, on the climate variables needed. By the same token,  evaluating adaptation options is not, de facto, part of the detailed category.   In addition, the categories are presented here as well-defined entities but in fact they represent a gradient  of increasing complexity in the climate data requested and/or produced. Examples of answers to each of the  questions and how they can be associated with one category are presented in Table 4.   Table 4 |  Overview of three climate information categories, basic, intermediate, and detailed.   CATEGORY EXAMPLE   OF PURPOSE  EXAMPLE OF   CLIMATE INDEX  EXAMPLE OF   SPATIAL RESOLUTION  EXAMPLE OF  CLIMATE STATISTIC Increasing   complexity  in the type  of climate  variable,  increase   in the  spatial and  temporal   resolution,  increase   in the  uncertainties   associated  with   information,  increase in  amount of   data  BASIC To raise awareness: -initial awareness -risk scanning -high level governance  Annual temperature Annual precipitation  Coarse scale  (e.g. the globe)  Mean (delta)  change   INTERMEDIATE To evaluate vulnerability/ impact study: -vulnerability assessment -impact study -increase resilience -early development of  adaptation plan  Growing degree- days  Heating degree-days  Freeze-thaw cycles   Variable  (e.g. a country,  province, watershed)  Future values  DETAILED To evaluate adaptation  options: -evaluate adaptation  measures -research and development -local governance  Wind Typically finer scale  (e.g. a municipality)  Extremes  Note that the goal is not necessarily to ‘advance’ from one category to the next but simply to choose the  most appropriate category for a given purpose. For some users, there will be a progression in the type of  information they require based on their current knowledge and on the types of decisions they have to make  over time. However, for others, basic climate information will suffice to inform fairly complex decisions.   To further help users visualize and evaluate their own climate information needs, the criteria described  above have been used to develop a decision-tree (Figure 17) that is in essence a roadmap to producing cli- mate information. By answering the roadmap questions, users are guided to one of three broad categories  of climate information: basic, intermediate, and detailed.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  36  W ha  t I s   yo ur   m ai  n  fo  cu s/  go al  W ha  t w ill   th e   in fo  rm at  io n   be  u  se d   fo r ?  To  e  va lu  at e   vu ln  er ab  ili ty   (s en  si tiv  ity ) o  r t o   st ud  y  im  pa ct  s  / o  pp or  tu ni  tie s   To  ra  is e   aw ar  en es  s  ab  ou t c  lim at  e  ch  an ge  A re   y ou   in te  re st  ed  in   m an  ip ul  at in  g  th  e  da  ta  y  ou rs  el f ?  W ha  t c lim  at e   va ria  bl es   a re   o f i  nt er  es t ?  Si ng  le  in  de x:   a ll   ot he  r v ar  ia bl  es    an d   in di  ce s   no t d  ire ct  ly  d  er iv  ed    fr om   T  o  r P  (e  .g . h  um id  ity , w  in d,    sn  ow , i  ce  s  to rm  )  To  e  va lu  at e   ad ap  ta tio  n  op  tio ns     Ye s  N o  A re   th e   un ce  rt ai  nt ie  s  in   c lim  at e   pr oj  ec tio  ns    im po  rt an  t ?  Re ce  nt  p  as t  To  ru  n  an   im pa  ct  m  od el    (d  ire ct   u se   o f o  ut pu  t) N  o  D et  ai le  d  D et  ai le  d  D et  ai le  d In  te rm  ed ia  te  In te  rm ed  ia te  Ba si  c  Ba si  c  D et  ai le  d  To  p  re se  nt  c  lim at  e  in  fo rm  at io  n  to    st  ak eh  ol de  rs  In te  rm ed  ia te  Ba si  c Ye  s  In te  rm ed  ia te  Ba si  c  EX AM  PL ES   O F   CO M  M O  N  C  LI M  AT E   IN FO  RM AT  IO N   F O  RM AT  S Sy  nt he  sis  ta  bl es    Cl  im at  e  no  rm al  s  Hi  st or  ic al   tr en  ds  (s  ta tio  n  da  ta ,   ho m  og en  ize d   cl im  at e   re co  rd s)  De lta   c ha  ng es  :       M ap   o f p  ro je  ct ed   g lo  ba l c  ha ng  es      M ap   o f p  ro je  ct ed   re gi  on al   c ha  ng es    Al  l f or  m at  s f ro  m  th  e  ba  sic  c  at eg  or y   + Sp  ati al   a na  lo gu  es    Sc att  er  p  lo ts    M  ap  o  f p ro  je ct  ed  fu  tu re   v al  ue s  Ev ol  uti on   o f f  ut ur  e  va  lu es    Cu  m ul  ati ve   d ist  rib uti  on  fu  nc tio  n  Al l f  or m  at s f  ro m   th e   ba sic   a nd    in  te rm  ed ia  te  c  at eg  or ie  s + Te  m po  ra l s  er ie  s  An  al ys  is  of   e xt  re m  es  –  ID F   cu rv  es An  al ys  is  of   lo w  -c on  fid en  ce  c  lim at  e  in  di ce  s a nd   e ve  nt s   H ow   w ill   th e   da ta   b e   us ed   ?    To  e  va lu  at e   th e   re la  tio ns  hi p   be tw  ee n   cl im  at e   va ria  bl e   an d   sy st  em  /   to  g  ai n   un de  rs ta  nd in  g  of   p ot  en tia  l c ha  ng es     Ye s  N o,   th e   da ta    sh  ou ld   b e   an al  ys ed  W ha  t i s   th e   st at  is tic   o f i  nt er  es t?  Si ng  le  v  ar ia  bl e:   Te m  pe ra  tu re   (T ),   Pr ec  ip ita  tio n   (P ) o  r i nd  ex  d  er iv  ed    fr om   T  o  r P  (e  .g . g  ro w  in g-  de gr  ee    da ys  , f re  ez e-  th aw   c yc  le s)  Fu tu  re  m  ea n   ch an  ge s  Ch an  ge s   in    ex tr  em es   (r ec  en t   pa st   a nd   fu tu  re )  Fu tu  re  v  al ue  s  Is  y  ou r s  tu dy   re gi  on  <  50    km 2   o  r i nc  lu de   im po  rt an  t  to  po gr  ap hi  c  re  lie f ?  Figure 17 |  Decision tree to evaluate climate information needs    37  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  2.2 CLIMATE INFORMATION FORMATS  As stated above, climate information categories evaluate the general level of information complexity  required by users. However, the way in which the information is presented may be equally as important.  Proper formatting of the information may ensure the data is not only useful but becomes more usable. User  backgrounds and areas of expertise will play a large role in determining the optimal format. In other words,  the same climate information can be presented differently depending on expertise or preference.   The term format is used to refer to the way in which the information is presented, or the layout of the  information. For example, the projected changes in annual temperature over Canada for the horizon 2050  (the climate information) can be communicated using a table, or a map, or a regression line (the format).   The formats presented in the guidebook have been separated into the three climate information categories.  However, just as it was the case for the categories, the formats also represent a gradient from very simple  representations of climate data to more complex visuals. It can be difficult at times to clearly associate them  with one specific category. More importantly, the climate data requested may be complex and hence fall into  the detailed category, but the way the information must be presented may need to be simplified.  Formats and user type  Climate information formats are about how to present the climate data and as such reflect a type of  decision-maker or end-user, their expertise and preferences.       CATALOGUE OF CLIMATE  INFORMATION FORMATS  CHAPTER THREE     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  40  The goal of this section is to present how climate information can be tailored to the audience. In other words,  the same climate information (e.g. past trends or projected future changes) can be presented using different  formats. For example, projected changes in temperatures can be presented using a synthesis table (e.g. p.43),  a map (e.g. p.48), or using a graph that plots the evolution of the change over time (e.g. p.59).   The objective of this chapter is to present as many of the most commonly used formats as possible (Table 5).  However, new formats are continually being developed by climate service providers and particular formats  can always be created to meet the preferences of decision-makers or the particularities of a project.  In order to increase the capacity of decision-makers to critically evaluate the information that is provided to  them, all figures, graphs and maps presented in this section are accompanied by explanations that describe:  1) what climate information is presented and how should it be interpreted, 2) how the figure is constructed  and 3) what are the limitations/caveats/possible ways to misinterpret the information.  In addition, the use  of coloured font will remind the reader that additional information on key climate science concepts can be  found in Chapter 1.  Table 5 |  Climate information formats associated with each of the three climate information categories.   CATEGORY TYPE OF CLIMATE INFORMATION  COMMONLY PROVIDED  EXAMPLES OF COMMON CLIMATE  INFORMATION FORMATS  BASIC Historical trends and future  mean changes over large spatial  and temporal scales and for  simple climate variables  Synthesis tables  Climate normals  Historical trends (station data,  homogenized climate records) Delta changes:     Map of projected global changes    Map of projected regional changes   INTERMEDIATE Future changes or future  absolute values of more complex  climate variables over finer  spatial scales  All formats from the basic category + Spatial analogues  Scatter plots  Map of projected future values Evolution of future values  Cumulative distribution function  DETAILED Future changes in means,  absolute values and extremes  over finer spatial scales  All formats from the basic and  intermediate categories + Temporal series  Analysis of extremes –IDF curves Analysis of low-confidence climate  indices and events     BASIC CATEGORY    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  42  This category includes historical climate information that comes from observed climate data along with  projected mean future changes that are simulated from climate models.   The climate information included in this category is generally produced for large areas and long time periods.  Coarse spatial and temporal scales and resolutions make this type of information relevant to a large number  of users. It represents the type of information more readily available in summary reports and on websites.   Five examples are presented to highlight how past and future climate information can be tailored using  varying formats. From the simplest format to the slightly more complex, they are:   › Synthesis table – used to present both past and future changes   › Climate normals – used to present climatic averages (e.g. 30-year)   › Historical trends – used to present long-term evolution of the past climate   › Delta changes  • Global maps –  used to present projected changes on a global scale • Regional maps – used to present projected changes on a smaller spatial scale    43  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  1.  SYNTHESIS TABLE   Table 6 |  Summary of projected climate change for the province of British Columbia for the horizon 2050 (2041-2070)    in comparison to the reference period 1961-1990. Values are calculated using an ensemble of 30 global    climate model projections derived from 15 different GCMs each one using two SRES greenhouse gas emissions    scenarios (A2 and B1).  Source: Information was taken from PCIC website (http://www.pacifi cclimate.org/analysis-tools/plan2adapt)    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  44  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? Table 6 shows projected changes (deltas) in mean  temperature, precipitation, growing degree-days  and frost-free days for the horizon 2050 (2041- 2070) compared to the reference period 1961- 1990 for the province of British Columbia.  The projected changes presented in the table are  straightforward increases for annual temperature,  annual growing degree-days, annual frost-free  days, as well as for annual and winter precipitation  over the province of British Columbia. On the  other hand, the median projection for summer  precipitation shows a slight decrease. The range  in the values highlights that there can be large  differences among all the simulations used. For  example, one simulation projects increases as  low as +179 degree-days per year while another  projects values of +429 degree-days per year.   How is the table constructed? Synthesis tables can summarize historical trends  or projected changes (such as the example given  here) for a given future time horizon and region  of interest, and can be expressed for different  time periods (monthly, seasonal, or annual). The  summary can be done for any area of interest,  such as global, provincial, or regional scales.   Projected changes are calculated as the change  between the 2050 horizon (2041-2070) and  the 1961-1990 reference period using 15 global  climate models with two SRES emission scenarios.  An important point here is that, as shown in section  1.11.2, the changes represent the difference  between simulated future values and simulated  reference values. In other words, the changes do  not represent the difference between a model  simulation and observed climate normals (or  reference) values but rather the difference within  a simulation.  In the table presented here, the changes in the  four climatic variables are expressed as the  median change and the spread in the simulation  ensemble. The ensemble median is a mid- point value of all simulations used to calculate  the changes (30 in this case), while the range  represents the 10th and 90th percentiles of all  values. The range in values from the different  models is generally referred to as the uncertainty  in the models, although it is made up of more  than just differences between models.   What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? The main limitation of this information resides  in the fact that the changes are often estimated  over large areas, and may therefore not represent  potentially important local differences. For  example, in this particular case, the values are  given for all of British Columbia, a province with  large topographic relief in some regions. Given  the importance of topographic features of this  province, it is easy to imagine that the ‘average’  changes given in the table may not adequately  represent all environments found in British  Columbia.  In addition, it is important to remember that while  the changes are projected over the 2050 horizon,  the actual change may be gradual and therefore  not felt exactly during the year 2050. In addition,  the absence of changes at the annual scale could  mean that there are no changes at all, or that  changes during one season offset changes in  another. More importantly, because of the natural  variability in the climate, there may be individual  years (or a series of consecutive years) where the  annual change is in opposition to the average  change calculated over the 30-year period (2041- 2070). In other words, while the table presents  an increase in average annual temperatures  compared to the reference period, it quite likely  that some years will show annual temperatures  that are lower than what has been experienced  on average over the reference period.    45  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  18 | GUIDE SUR LES SCÉNARIOS CLIMATIQUES  3.1.2 – Normales climatiques  Figure 4. Normales climatiques de la température annuelle moyenne (°C) pour la période de référence 1971-2000. Les valeurs sont calculées à  partir de données de stations météorologiques d’Environnement Canada qui ont été interpolées sur une grille de 10 km par 10 km et qui sont  disponibles sur un site de RNCan16.  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos  2.  CLIMATE NORMALS  Figure 18 |  Climate normals of mean annual temperature (°C) for the reference period 1971-2000. The values are    calculated using Environment Canada station data that has been interpolated on a 10 km by 10 km grid and    made available through an NRCan database45-46 (see text).  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  46  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure presents a map of observed average  annual temperatures across Canada for the period  1971-2000 on a 10 km by 10 km grid.   This figure shows that average or normal annual  temperatures vary greatly across Canada. For  example, while average temperatures in Toronto  are around 5°C, average annual temperatures  in Whitehorse and Yellowknife are closer to  -5 to -10°C. This implies that populations,  infrastructures and ecosystems are already  adapted to different climatic conditions.  How is the figure constructed? Climate normals are observed climate variable  averages calculated using time-series of climatic  data obtained from meteorological stations  across Canada*. Such maps can represent simple  climatic variables such as mean temperature and  precipitation but the same format can be used  to showcase any other climatic indices, such  as growing degree-days or number of freeze- thaw cycles. Meteorological station data can be  averaged over any given region of interest (a single  province for example) and for any given time step,  depending on data availability (such as annual or  monthly for example).  In this case, the figure shows 30-year temperature  normals on a regular grid (where each polygon   or grid point is 10 km by 10 km), and where  each polygon value corresponds to the average  temperature for the 1971-2000 period. The  daily temperature values are averaged for each  year from 1971 and 2000 and the average of  those 30 values is plotted on the figure. Note  that climate normals are generally given for the  same timeframe that is used as a reference in the  construction of climate scenarios, but that it is not  necessarily  always  the case.  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? Figures of this type give decision-makers an  estimate of past general conditions for their area  of interest. However, the values are averaged for  a relatively long period of time that masks the  season-to-season or year-to-year variability in  the climate. This information is more adequate  for ‘big picture’ decisions. For example, it is clear  from such information that while you may be able  to grow grain species in southern Canada, it is not  possible to do so in Northern Canada. However,  the information may not provide enough detail  for more local decisions; for example, such as  deciding what specific crop species to plant. This  decision would require additional information,  such as the range in climate conditions that will  be experienced by the crop species. In addition,  the map shows average recent past conditions but  gives no indication about how those conditions  may change in the future. Consequently, using  historical information alone could lead to  maladaptation.  * This data comes from a Natural Resources Canada database44 in the form of a gridded data set that covers all of Canada with a grid  size of 10 km by 10 km with a daily time step (Environment Canada meteorological station data is interpolated on this grid). The data  covers the period 1950-2010. The same analysis could be done using station data itself or using other similar datasets with different  grid sizes (e.g. CANGRID).    47  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  3.  HISTORICAL TRENDS  Figure 19 |  Historic annual total precipitation (mm) time series for the period 1901-2005 for an Environment Canada    homogenized climatological station46. Trends for 1901-2005 and 1971-2005 are shown in blue and red,    respectively.  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  48  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure shows observed total annual  precipitation values (mm) over the years 1901- 2005 at a southern Alberta station along with  linear trends for two periods, namely 1901-2005  and 1971-2005.  The figure demonstrates the extent of the natural  variability (black line) in total annual precipitation  for the period 1901-2005. This natural range shows  years with as little as 50mm of total precipitation  and years with close to 350 mm of precipitation.  The figure also illustrates that while the 1901- 2005 trend is insignificant, total precipitation  amounts start to increase slightly in the seventies.  How is the figure constructed? Trends over the historical period are calculated  using climatic time-series obtained from an  Environment Canada database for the location  indicated on the map (Adjusted and Homogenized  Canadian Climate Data, AHCCD46). This dataset  provides adjusted and homogenized climate  data for many meteorological stations across  Canada. Homogenized means that the data at  those stations has been corrected for changes  in instrumentation, measurement technique, or  changes in the location of the stations, which may  have occurred over time. This type of data is better  suited for evaluating climate trends, compared to  non-homogenized data.  The figure can represent simple climatic variables  such as mean temperature and precipitation or  other climatic variables or indices. The data from  meteorological stations can be averaged over  different regions of interest and for different time  steps such as ‘seasonal’, ‘monthly’ or ‘annual’,  depending on the availability of the data.  The black line and dots represent the yearly  observed values for the chosen location, while  the blue and red lines represent the trends for the  periods 1901-2005 and 1971-2005, respectively.  The trends are calculated using a linear non- parametric  regression  technique (Sen  slope).  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? It is very important to remember that, in this  type of analysis, the chosen period over which  the trends are calculated will greatly influence  whether a trend is found or not. In other words,  different trends can be observed depending on  the start and end dates chosen, which can lead  to a misinterpretation of the overall long-term  trends. For example, a closer examination of the  figure can quickly reveal certain periods over  which decreasing trends are observed (from  1951-1961 for example) or where an increasing  trend prevails (e.g. from 1919-1928).   Consequently, it cannot be assumed that the  past trend will be an indication of the future and  therefore informing decisions based on a given  past trend should be done with extreme caution.  Rather, the most appropriate use of historical  trends is to give context to the magnitude of future  projections. This is the reason why climate models  play such a central role in our understanding of  the climate to come.    49  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  4.  MAPS OF DELTA CHANGES  Figure 20|  A. Maps of CMIP5 multi-model mean results for the scenarios RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 in 2081-2100 of annual  mean surface temperature change. The number of CMIP5 models used to calculate multi-model mean is indicated in  the upper right corner of each panel. Hatching indicates regions where the multi-model mean is small compared to  natural variability (i.e. less than one standard deviation of natural internal variability in 20-year means) and the stippling  indicate regions where the multi-model mean is large relative to the natural variability (greater than two standard  deviations of the internal variability in 20-year means) and where at least 90% of models agree on the sign of change.  Source: IPCC 201319  B. Map of projected changes in temperature (°C) between the reference period 1971-2000 and the 2080 horizon (2071- 2100). The values are calculated from an ensemble of 137 global climate simulations from the CMIP3 ensemble. The  large panel on the left shows the median values from the ensemble, while the smaller panels on the right show the 10th  and 90th percentile values at each grid cell from the ensemble. Source: T. Logan, Ouranos  A  B    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  50  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The top figure shows projected changes in  annual mean temperature across the globe for  the horizon 2081-2100 in comparison to the  reference period 1986-2005, for RCPs 2.6 and 8.5,  as published by the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) in their latest assessment  report, published in 201319. The figure suggests  that the Arctic region will warm more rapidly than  the global mean, and that mean warming over  land will be larger than over the ocean.   The bottom figure also presents projected  changes in mean annual temperature but for a  smaller domain, namely across Canada, for the  horizon 2080 (2071-2100) in comparison with  the reference period 1971-2000. Median changes  in annual temperature for the 2080 horizon  range from 2.5°C to 5°C, while the 10th and 90th  percentiles suggest changes as low as 1°C and as  high as 8°C (not in the same locations however).  The greatest changes are expected to occur in  Northern regions.  How is the figure constructed? The information presented in these figures is  essentially the same as the information given in  synthesis tables except that the expected changes  are presented as maps, usually based on gridded  data. The changes are calculated for a specific  future horizon by comparing it to the reference  period (this is often referred to as the change-field  method). The difference is calculated for each  polygon (or model grid cell) and for all climate  simulations that have been chosen. The changes  can be calculated for any given time frame, such  as monthly, seasonal or annual changes (as is the  case here).   In both figures, a large number of models were  used to compute the changes. In Figure A, 32  models from the CMIP5 ensemble were used  with RCP2.6 and 39 CMIP5 models with RCP8.5.  For Figure B, the changes or deltas were obtained  using 137 global model simulations from the  CMIP3 using 3 SRES emissions scenarios (A2, A1b,  B1). The changes are subsequently plotted over a  common grid. Note that the size of the polygons  is generally driven by the resolution of the climate  models used. For example, global climate models  typically have a resolution of approximately 200- 300 km whereas regional climate models have a  resolution of approximately 45 km and less.  To synthesize the outputs from all the simulations  used, a mean (as in the top Figure) or a median  (as in the bottom Figure) of the ensemble is often  shown. As with the synthesis table, the range in  the simulations, which gives an estimate of the  uncertainty in the projections, should also be  represented. In Figure A (globe), this is done by  the use of hatching and stippling that indicate  whether the multi-model mean presented on  the figure is small or large in comparison with  the natural variability. In Figure B (Canada), this  is done by giving not only the median value of  the simulation ensemble (left panel) but also  giving complementary maps that show the range  in the simulations, expressed by the 10th and  90th percentiles. The choice of the percentiles is  arbitrary, and could potentially take on any value  of choice, such as 25th and 75th percentiles for  example.   What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? While such figures point to the fact that  temperatures are increasing across large scales,  they also highlight the fact that not all regions  will experience the same increase. Consequently,  this type of climate information may be useful to  raise the awareness of stakeholders to climate  change. However, it does not detail how local  changes may differ significantly from this global or  national picture. Consequently, using such coarse  projections implies that the local relevance of  adaptation decisions is less certain.  In addition, the values shown on such figures  give the amount of change that is estimated by  the models. However, in order to appreciate how  important that change may be, it is often necessary  to combine this information with climate normals,  which give users a baseline value upon which to  evaluate the projected changes. Similarly, climate  trends can provide additional context to aid with  the interpretation of the magnitude of future  changes.    INTERMEDIATE CATEGORY    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  52  This category only includes information about projected future climate changes. The climate information  produced for this category often tends to be for a more specific spatial scale than the information produced  in the basic category. Consequently, the climate information is increasingly tailored to suit the specific needs  of users. The examples shown here will help users familiarize themselves with the interpretation of the  different formats.  Five examples are presented to highlight how climate information can be tailored using varying levels of  complexity. From the simplest format to the most complex, they are:   › Spatial analogues – used to present where the historical climate will be in the future   › Scatter plots –used to show changes in climate variables for different climate simulations   › Map of projected future values – used to present projected future values of a climate variable   › Evolution of future values – used to present projected evolution of future values   › Cumulative distribution function – used to present the distribution of the projected future values  Note that the last three formats show the same climate information for the exact same location – they are  therefore a good example of what is meant by «presenting the same climate information using different  formats».     53  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  1.  SPATIAL ANALOGUE  Figure 21 |  Spatial analogue for the greater Toronto area for the 2080 horizon (2071-2100). A. The regions where    the recent climate (1971-2000) is similar to the climate projected for the greater Toronto area in 2080    (2071-2100). B. The regions where the projected future climate (2071- 2100) is similar to that of the    greater Toronto area for the recent past (1971-2000). The similitude categories indicate the level of    similarity between the observed climate and the projected climate for the region of interest (using 136    global climate simulations). The analogues are based on a statistical comparison between the current and    future distributions of mean annual temperature and total annual precipitation for the reference period    1971-2000 and the horizon 2080 (2071-2100).   Source: T. Logan, Ouranos  A  B    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  54  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure presents spatial analogues for the  greater Toronto area (GTA) for the 2080 time  horizon (2071-2100). On the top panel, the green  areas illustrate regions where the reference  climate (1971-2000)resembles what the climate  of the GTA is projected to be in 2080. On the  bottom panel, the green areas represent areas  where the reference climate of Toronto may be  found in 2080.  The top panel indicates that the area where recent  past (1971-2000) temperatures and precipitation  resemble the most what the greater Toronto area  may look like in 2080 is fairly large and includes  cities like Detroit, Cleveland, Chicago, and  Pittsburgh. New York and Philadelphia also exhibit  a high level of similarity in the simulations.  As for the 2080 location of Toronto’s current  temperature and precipitation distributions  (bottom panel), the highest similarities are  obtained along a transect that cuts through an  area south of Lake Superior and North of Lake  Huron, encompassing the cities of Sault Ste-Marie  and Sudbury. The analogue region extends past  Timmins in the North.  One of the interesting uses of this information  is to identify analogue regions in terms of their  current ability to adapt to the climate. This allows  an evaluation of whether the region of interest  can take advantage of some of the practices  developed in the analogue region to adapt to  climate change.  How is the figure constructed? Analogue techniques involve a comparison  between the anticipated future climate of a  region of interest with historical climate of  other regions47. The comparison is based on the  similarity between the distributions of climate  variables between the reference and future  horizons (1971-2000 and 2071-2100 in this case).  The similarity indices can be calculated using  various metrics (e.g.48-51).  In theory, this method of climate data  communication allows for any number of variables  to be considered in the comparison. For example,  one could simply want to find a temperature  analogue for a given city, while another user may   instead be interested in finding an analogue for the  same region that takes into account temperature,  precipitation, and growing degree-days.  In this particular case, the analogues for the  future climate around Toronto in 2071-2100 are  based on two climate indices, namely total annual  precipitation and annual temperature. To simplify  the interpretation, the median distance values for  136 CMIP3 simulations were divided into three  levels of similarity, plotted using a colour gradient.  The «high» level of similarity represents the first  10% of the median distance values, the «medium»  level represents the 10 to 20%, and the «low»  level represents the next 20 to 30% of values.  Values with a smaller similarity index (greater  than 30%) were not considered as analogues and  are therefore not shown on the map.   What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? A noteworthy drawback of this technique is that  it can be difficult to find analogues that share  the same characteristics for a large number of  climate variables. In fact, analogues often capture  only a few key aspects of the climate because  they are based on a few climate indices, not the  whole thing. For example, in this case, New York  shows a high level of similitude with Toronto.  However, New York, being a much more coastal  city compared to Toronto, will experience climate  events that are vastly different from what Toronto  will ever experience. Consequently, the choice  of the climate variables of interest will influence  the results. In addition, analyses that includes  analogues often rely on the hypothesis that  regions with similarities in certain aspects could  also share similarities in other aspects (such as  soil type, topography, vegetation)52, which may  not always be the case. Caution must therefore be  exercised when comparing a given region with its  analogues.    55  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  32 | GUIDE SUR LES SCÉNARIOS CLIMATIQUES  3.2.2 – Diagramme de dispersion  Figure 9.  Changements projetés de la température moyenne (°C) et des précipitations totales (%) pour les provinces du Nouveau-Brunswick et  de la Nouvelle-Écosse durant les mois d’hiver (DJF : décembre, janvier et février). Les changements sont illustrés pour un ensemble de simulations  climatiques globales selon RPC4.5 (n = 100, points bleus) et RCP8.5 (n = 60, points rouges). Les distributions associées à chaque ensemble de  simulations sont montrées dans les illustrations à gauche et en bas.  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos  2.  SCATTER PLOT  Figure 22   |  Projected changes in mean temperature (°C) and total precipitation (%) for the provinces of New Brunswick    and Nova Scotia for the winter months (DJF, December, January, and February) for the horizon 2080    (2071-2100) in comparison to a 1971-2000 reference period. The changes are shown for an ensemble    of global climate simulations under RPC4.5 (n = 100, blue points) and RCP8.5 (n = 60, red points). The    associated distributions of each set of simulations are shown on the left and bottom panels.  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  56  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure presents projected changes in winter  (DJF) precipitation and winter (DJF) temperature  for the 2080 horizon (2071-2100) by different  global simulations with RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 for the  provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, in  comparison with the 1971-2000 reference period.  The main panel shows a clear separation in  the projected changes between the two RCP  emission scenarios. Climate models that were  run with RCP8.5 show greater precipitation and  temperature changes. When all simulations are  considered, the range in temperatures deltas for  2080 varies from 0°C to 9°C, while changes in  precipitation range from -3% to 30%.  The density functions, on the left and bottom  of the figure, highlight a peak in the number of  simulations that show increases in temperatures  around 3°C for RCP4.5  and  of 6°C for RCP8.5.  In term of changes in precipitation, the density  functions peak around 5% for RCP4.5 and around  15% for RCP8.5. The curves show a good degree  of separation, with two distinct peaks, between  the two RCP families for temperature. In contrast,  the precipitation curves overlap a great deal.  How is the figure constructed? Scatter plots typically illustrate projected changes  (deltas) in precipitation and temperature,  although any two climate variables of interest  could be used, simulated by different climate  models under different emissions scenarios for a  region and future horizon of interest. They allow  a general view of the expected changes and more  importantly, of the range projected by an ensemble  of simulations. A rapid comparison between what  is expected under different emissions scenarios is  also possible.  This particular case presents the changes in  winter temperatures and precipitation for the  2080 (2071-2100) horizon with respect to the  1971-2000 reference period as projected by an  ensemble of CMIP5 simulations (100 simulations  with RCP4.5 and 60 simulations with RCP8.5).  The elliptical lines indicate the 50th, 75th, and 95th  percent confidence intervals.  The figure presented here also shows density  functions on the left and on the bottom of the  figure for all scenarios (black curve) and each RCP  family (coloured curves) for both climatic variable.  Note that these curves are not always presented  with scatter plots.  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? While this figure clearly highlights that there can  be a large spread in the projected changes under  different simulations, the causes (or sources) of  the spread in the simulations are not explained  in the graphic. However, understanding that  different sources of uncertainties (stemming from  natural variability, emissions scenarios or model  differences) have a different relative importance  over different timescales can be valuable  complementary information to decision-makers.  The fact that the changes in precipitation are  expressed as percentages should also be viewed  cautiously as some simulations can exhibit very  large changes in comparison to very low absolute  reference values.  Scatter plots are sometimes used to manually  select a sub-set of future scenarios; for example  scenarios showing the largest changes in annual  temperature and precipitation. However, the  position of individual scenarios in a scatter plot  can be highly variable from season to season and  from region to region. Consequently, selecting  scenarios using a two-dimensional scatter plot  based on annual changes may not be appropriate  if the seasonal impacts are of interest.    57  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  3.  FUTURE VALUES  Figure 23 |  Climatic normals in the number of freezing-degree days for the period 1971-2000 along with projected    future values for this index for the horizons 2050 (2046-2065) and 2090 (2081-2100), calculated using an    ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3 and 4 from CRCM4). The middle columns represent the median,    while the left and right columns represent the 10th and 90th percentiles of the ensemble, respectively.  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  58  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure shows the climatic normals and  the projections of absolute future values in  annual freezing degree-days for the province of  Newfoundland for the horizon 2050 (2046-2065)  and 2090 (2081-2100) on a 10 km by 10 km grid.  Freezing degree-days correspond to the absolute  difference between the mean daily temperature  and a threshold of 0°C. For example, if the daily  mean temperature is equal to -5°C, the number  of freezing degree-days for that day is equal to  5. If the temperature is above 0°C, the freezing  degree-days are equal to zero. Annual values are  obtained by adding up the freezing degree-day  values of all days of the year.  The top panel first highlights the fact that climate  normals in annual number of freezing degree- days are spatially variable over the province  of Newfoundland, with values ranging from  approximately 300 to 1300 for the period 1971- 2000. Note that these normals come from station  data; they are not simulated by climate models.  These values are used in the bias-correction  process to obtain future values presented in the  bottom panels.  The future maps point to a decrease in the  number of freezing degree-days, due to warming  temperatures. The median values (50th percentile  maps) show that there are fewer freezing degree- days in 2090 than in 2050. Notice that the biggest  differences in values are shown in the 10th  percentile maps.  How is the figure constructed? The top panel presents climatic normals for the  period 1971- 2000, which are derived as shown in  section 1.2.  Just as with the maps presented in the basic  category, the future values are calculated over  a specific future horizon. Values are calculated  for each of the climate simulations over every  polygon over a time frame of interest. In this  case, projected values in the annual number of  freezing degree-days are given for two future  horizons, namely 2050 and 2090. The 10th, 50th  and 90th percentile values represent the range in  the simulations used, namely 79 simulations (75  from the CMIP3 global ensemble and 4 from the  regional CRCM 4.2.3 model).  The largest difference between this data and  that presented in the previous category is that  these results do not present deltas or mean  changes between two time periods but rather  present future projected absolute values of  freezing degree-days for the two time horizons.  This information is often considered as an added  value to the more basic delta maps shown in the  previous sections and one that requires additional  post-processing of the data. The climate  scenarios obtained using a total of 79 simulations  underwent a bias-correction method to obtain  absolute values over a 10 km grid.  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? The fact that the 10th percentile maps show the  biggest changes as opposed to the 90th percentile  maps is important and may be somewhat  confusing. Indeed, the largest change is typically  represented by the 90th percentile simulations.  Imagine comparing future temperature values  with average annual temperatures for example.  One intuitively knows that if temperatures  are increasing, there will be a gradient in the  projected temperatures, such that 10th percentile  temperature < 50th percentile temperature <90th  percentile temperature. However, for the case of  freezing degree-days, there is an overall decreasing  trend and as a result, the lowest percentile map of  future values shows the largest decrease.     59  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  4.  EVOLUTION OF FUTURE VALUES  Figure 24 |  Left: Evolution of the mean annual number of growing degree-days for the years 1971-2100 for the Greater    Slave Lake region. The values are calculated using an ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3 and 4    from CRCM4), while the observations come from an NRCan dataset44,45. Right: The distributions values of    the regional mean for observed values (black curve) and projected values are shown as the 10th, 50th, and    90th percentiles of the ensemble of climate scenarios (green, blue, and red curves respectively).  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  60  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure presents the evolution of the number of  annual growing degree-days from 1971 to 2100 for  a region surrounding Yellowknife in the North West  Territories. Growing-degree days correspond to  the absolute difference in mean daily temperature  above a threshold of 5°C. For example, if the daily  mean temperature is equal to 10°C, the number of  growing degree-days for that day is equal to 5. If the  temperature is below 5°C, the growing degree-days  are equal to zero.   The left panel shows a projected increase in the  number of growing degree-days from 1971 to  2100. The simulation ensemble (grey envelope)  covers approximately the same range as the natural  variability (black dots).  The right panel shows an  upward shift in the distributions of the simulations for  2050 and 2090, particularly for the median and 90th  percentile distributions indicating a change in mean  climate conditions. The shapes of the coloured future  distributions do not change drastically (compared to  the black observed distribution) indicating that the  inter-annual variability is relatively similar between  the observed and future horizons.  How is the figure constructed? This type of figure presents the evolution of  projected values of a specific climatic variable for a  particular region of interest. Hence, it shows how  the values evolve over time. Here, three horizons are  represented, a 1971-2000 reference period, a 2050  horizon (2045-2065) and a 2090 horizon (2081-2100)  with a total of 79 simulations (75 from the CMIP3  global ensemble and 4 from the regional CRCM 4.2.3  model).   The left panel is constructed by averaging the  growing degree-days for all grid points for the region  of interest shown in the hatched area. The black  line shows observed values (notice the observed  natural variability of the climate over that time  period), the blue line represents the median of the  CMIP3 ensemble simulations and the grey envelope  represents the confidence interval around the  median. A bias correction post-processing method is  used to obtain future values.   The right panel shows the distribution of the 30  observed annual growing degree-day values for  the reference period (black line), as well as the  distributions of the 30 projected years for three  individual climate scenarios for both the 2050 (2046- 2065) and 2090 (2081-2100) horizons. The three  plotted scenarios are selected from the 79 available  simulations by first calculating the average delta  values for all scenarios for the two time horizons. The   three individual scenarios for each horizon are then  chosen as those having (1) the median (blue curve),  (2) the 10th (green curve) and (3) the 90th (red curve)  percentile values of the average projected change  out of the 79 simulations for the horizon in question.  Note that the three scenarios are not necessarily the  same for each horizon of interest (i.e. the scenario  showing the median change in 2050 is probably  not the median scenario in 2090). This panel uses a  scaling post-processing method which allows a direct  comparison of future scenarios with the observed  distribution.  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways to  misinterpret the information? The left panel reveals that while there is definitely a  projected increase in growing degree-days, there is  also a widening of the grey envelope (uncertainty)  into the future. An important point is that the grey  envelope contains all sources of uncertainty, not just  the inter-annual variability. For example, the widening  of the envelope could lead a user to mistakenly  conclude that in the future, the simulations project  both warmer  average conditions (centered  approximately in the middle of the envelope) and  an increased variability between individual years  (inter-annual variability). However, this is not how the  figure should be interpreted. The width of the grey  envelope for the future horizons is in fact the result of  multiple sources of uncertainty, not only inter-annual  natural variability, but also uncertainty between the  different SRES families (i.e. more or less GHGs in  the atmosphere), as well as uncertainties in climate  model sensitivity (i.e. how sensitive different climate  models are to a given increase in GHG concentrations).  It is therefore false to assume that the wider grey  envelope for future horizons solely represents greater  inter-annual variability, as represented by the grey  envelope for the reference period.  In order to better understand whether there is indeed  an increase in the inter-annual variability (increased  fluctuations between years) we need to investigate  the panel on the right. Comparing the coloured future  distributions with the observed distribution highlights  the fact that the distribution shape does not change  much in the future (similar widths, tails, etc.). What is  projected is a simple upward shift of the distribution  in the future, with an increased separation between  the green, blue and red curves between 2050 to  2090. Going back to the left panel we can now much  more easily conclude that, in this case, the change  in the grey envelope width is due to this increasing  separation between the individual climate scenarios  (due to differences in emissions and climate model  sensitivity) and not because of an increase in inter- annual variability.    61  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  5.  CUMULATIVE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION  Figure 25 |  Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the regional mean annual number of growing degree-days for the    reference period (1971-2000) and two future horizons (2050 and 2090) for the Greater Slave Lake region. The    values are calculated using an ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3 and 4 from CRCM4), while the    observations come from an NRCan dataset44,45. Shown are the observed values (black curve) and projected    values for the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the ensemble of climate scenarios (green, blue and red    curves).  Source: T. Logan, Ouranos    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  62  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? The figure presents cumulative distribution  functions (CDF) of the projected number of  growing degree-days for the reference period and  the 2050 (top) and 2090 (bottom) future horizons  for the Yellowknife region.  This format of presentation allows for an easy  comparison between the different percentile  distribution of observed and projected changes,  as well as an evaluation of exceeding given  thresholds. For example, a year with a growing  degree-day mean of around 800, which is a  fairly common occurrence in the observations  (black line), is projected to occur less than 5% of  the time by the median scenario over the 2050  horizon. Over the 2090 horizon, the proportion  of projected values that will be inferior or equal  to 800 is only about 0.18 for the 10th percentile  scenario (green line). On the other hand, the  90th percentile scenario (red line) points to  an increasing proportion of years with higher  numbers of growing degree-days.  How is the figure constructed? The figure presents the same information  shown on the distribution curves of the previous  evolution figure (right panel) but displayed in a  different manner. The cumulative curves show  the proportion of years (vertical axis) that have  values inferior or equal to a given value of growing  degree-days (horizontal axis).  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? Users have to keep in mind that the proportion  values presented in this figure do not represent  a probability of occurrence. The uncertainty  in the simulations, represented here by the  coloured lines, remains important. More weight  or importance cannot be assigned to one curve  over another. In other words, one scenario (line)  is not more likely than another.  In addition, it may be fairly difficult to visualize  what the information presented in this type  of figure actually represents for a given area.  This type of graphic is in fact rarely given on its  own but tends to be complementary to a map  (where differences over the study area are better  represented) or to an evolution figure (where  average changes over the study area more easily  discerned).    DETAILED CATEGORY    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  64  Similarly to the intermediate category, the climate information in this last category is focused on projected  future climate changes. However, the analysis targets not only average or mean changes in a climate variable  over time but also estimates changes in extreme events and for climate indices for which there is less  confidence in model projections at this time.  The information given to users in this category is often tailored specifically to their needs and will often not  be relevant or usable by others.   The examples used to highlight the type of information available in this category have been grouped into four  examples. From the simplest to the most complex, they are:   › Temporal series – used to provide outputs from climate models for impacts models • Hydrology   › Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves – used to analyze extreme precipitation events   › Analysis of low-confidence climate indices and events • Climate model scenarios • Synthetic scenarios    65  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  1.  TEMPORAL SERIES  Figure 26 |  A. Projected change in mean annual discharge (Qmean) for the 2041-2070 period in comparison with the    reference period 1971- 2000 using an ensemble of 89 CMIP3 simulations and B. mean annual hydrograph    for the reference and future periods for one of the sub-watersheds.  Source: A. Centre d’expertise hydrique du Québec (2013)53 and B. Gauvin- St-Denis, Ouranos    A  B    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  66  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? Figure 26 shows projected changes in mean  annual discharge values for the 2050 time horizon  for a small watershed in Quebec (left panel) along  with a mean annual hydrograph for one sub-basin  (right panel). The left panel shows a south-north  gradient in annual discharge changes with little  change in the south and increases on the order  of 7-9% in the northern portion of the region of  interest. On the right, the corresponding mean  annual hydrograph for one of the sub-basins  shows changes in the periodicity of the flow for  that location. The figure shows a projected shift  in the peak discharge in the spring, with an earlier  peak for the future 2041-2070 horizon compared  to the 1971-2000 reference period. In addition,  discharge values are lower in the summer and fall  months in 2041-2070 while they are higher for the  winter months.  How is the figure constructed? In this example, outputs from global climate  model simulations were imported into an impacts  model, namely a hydrological model to evaluate  how future discharges would be change.   The climate model output data provided was  relatively simple and consisted of total annual  precipitation values, maximum and minimum  daily temperatures for both the reference  period (1971-2000) and for the 2050 future time  horizon. These three climate variables were  subsequently imported into one hydrological  model that calculated daily discharge values for  both periods and the change between the two  periods. This analysis used a total number of  89 CMIP3 simulations and five different bias- correction-post processing techniques along  with the hydrological model to generate 445  climate change scenarios. These scenario results  are then used to calculate the amplitude of the  mean change in discharge which is shown on  the left panel. The 445 climate scenarios are also  used to produce the mean annual hydrograph on  the right panel. The solid lines represent a daily  30-year mean (either for the reference period in  black or the future in red), while the envelopes  represent the 10th and 90th percentiles for each  time period.  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? One of the biggest difficulties with using temporal  series is that it demands a capacity to handle  very large datasets. In addition, it is important  to remember that the information provided is  often very case specific and it may be difficult  to extrapolate the results to other regions.  This is true for the example shown here, where  both the climate data used as inputs and/or the  parametrization of the impacts model is done for  certain conditions only. Given the specificity of  the information used for one region, one must be  careful when extrapolating the projected changes  to other regions.  More specific caveats for this example include  that fact that the information given by the percent  change in discharge may not be complete or  detailed enough to make decisions. Indeed, the  analysis involved in producing this type of figure  is complex and results in a very large number  of scenarios. The mean change shown from all  scenarios can be considered as an advantage in  having a single scenario, and therefore a simple  to understand value. However, the uncertainty  associated with the ensemble is also very large,  with scenarios often exhibiting opposite trends  that are not shown in the figure. Given that our  current knowledge does not allow us to reject any  of the scenarios, this uncertainty should not be  ignored. The fact that the changes are expressed  as percentages should also be viewed cautiously  as some scenarios can exhibit very large changes  in comparison to a very low reference discharge  value (large relative change but small absolute  change).    67  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  2.  INTENSITY-DURATION-FREQUENCY CURVES (ANALYSIS OF EXTREMES)   Figure 27 |  Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves for the St-Lawrence valley simulated for the present (aet) and future    (aeu) climate by the CRCM driven by a global climate model CGCM #4. The lines indicate the intensity for    events with four different fixed frequency return intervals (2, 5, 10, and 25 years).   Source: David Huard (Ouranos)    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  68  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? This figure presents the Intensity-Duration- Frequency (IDF) curves for the reference period  (1961-2000, yellow lines) and the 2050 time  horizon (2041-2070, blue lines) for the St- Lawrence valley for return periods of 2, 5, 10,  and 25 years using a single simulation from the  Canadian Regional Climate Model (CRCM 4.2.3  driven by the global model CGCM3#4).   The figure shows rainfall intensity (mm/hr) on  the y-axis, rainfall duration (hr) on the x-axis, and  rainfall frequency (how often rainfall occurs), as  the coloured lines. In this case, rainfall durations  (accumulation period on the x-axis) are calculated  for five durations: 1, 2, 6, 12, and 24 hours. The  simulation projects increases in the amount of  rainfall accumulated for all four return intensities,  particularly for the 6 and 12 hour rainfall events.  For the 10 and 25 year return intensities, the  accumulation over 24 hours is very similar  between the 1961-2000 and 2041-2070 horizons.  How is the figure constructed? An Intensity-Duration-Frequency curve is a  graphical representation of the probability that  a given average rainfall intensity will occur. The  simulated precipitation for both the reference  and future periods are in this case calculated  using one CRCM simulation. Such curves are of  considerable importance to engineers and others  that must design municipal infrastructure to deal  with precipitation events.  What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? It is important to remember that this particular  case represents the values for the region of  interest (meaning the average of many grid points  is shown), which may not adequately represent  specific locations. In addition, a sinlge simulation  is used and therefore the figure does not  showcase the range (uncertainty) of a simulation  ensemble. This is an important limitation for  decision-makers as there is no way of evaluating  how this simulation compares with others. Thus,  relying solely on this single simulation would not  be advised.    69  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  3.  ANALYSIS OF LIMITED CONFIDENCE VARIABLES – THE CHOICE BETWEEN  SYNTHETIC SCENARIOS OR CLIMATE MODEL SCENARIOS  There are numerous climatic indices and climate events requested by decision-makers (Table 7) for which  the confidence in the climate information that can be provided is limited. Different causes are responsible for  this lower confidence. First, the resolution of models may not allow the model to ‘see’ the phenomena (e.g.  convective storms); second, the physics behind the phenomena may not be fully understood (e.g. sea ice);  third, the inclusion of the equations that represent the phenomena into a climate model may increase the  cost of running the simulation by a factor that renders this inclusion prohibitive (e.g. ice storms); fourth, for  some indices and events, there is very little available observed data, which prevents an adequate evaluation  of the performance of models (e.g. soil moisture); and finally, the information for some indices and events  may be available but not at a resolution that suits the needs of users (e.g. atmospheric pressure).  INDEX Wind speed Ice storm Humidity Tropical cyclones (or other storms) Soil moisture Atmospheric pressure Sea ice Convective storms Snow on the ground Droughts Wave height  Table 7 |  Examples of climate indices or events with limited confidence     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  70  Collaboration between the user and climate service provider will be of utmost importance for these va- riables and caution must be exercised. Indeed, the limitations in either the observations (which would  influence the understanding of historical trends) or in the skill of the models (which would influence the  reliability of future projections) have to be carefully examined and understood before the data is used by  a decision-maker. The confidence will vary greatly depending on the variable of interest and on the study  region.   Two methods can be used to evaluate the impacts of future changes in these variables:     › The first is to rely on climate model simulations, such as what is presented by the formats given in  the guidebook, but with a clear understanding that the uncertainties for these variables are important.  Nonetheless, the availability of observations for the climate variables identified in Table 7 is increasing  along with the understanding of the processes generating them. Consequently, it is expected that our  confidence in climate model projections for these lesser known variables will likely increase in the near  future.    › The second is to rely on synthetic scenarios (also often called ‘what-if’ scenarios), where hypothetical  futures are derived based on the best available information. Very simply, synthetic scenarios are created  by adjusting climate elements incrementally by arbitrary amounts into the future, based on expert judg- ment. The way in which they are adjusted should be consistent with either GCM outputs or historical  climate data3. They can be constructed for climate variables for which we have a high degree of confi- dence (such as temperature for example) but where resources to run climate models are limited. In such  cases, the scenarios will allow a rapid first evaluation of the potential sensitivity of a system. They are  particularly useful, however, for cases where the climate index of interest is not well understood at this  time or is not well represented by climate models. In such cases, climate scientists develop hypothetical  futures based on the best available information.     71  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  SYNTHETIC SCENARIO  Figure 28 |  Extent of flood zone as simulated by synthetic scenario 9, presented in Table 8 (QT100 + 2000m3/s).    Source: Thomas et al. 201254  Table 8 |  List of nine what-if (synthetic) scenarios constructed to simulate changes in discharge along the Rivières-des-   Prairies, on the North shore of Montreal. Q2 and Q100 represent total annual discharges with a return period    of 2 years and 100 years, respectively.   Source: Adapted from Thomas et al. 201254  SCENARIO PROJECTED CHANGE IN DISCHARGE 1 Q2 years 2 Q2 years +234 m3/s 3 Q2 years +468 m3/s 4 Q2 years +702 m3/s 5 Q100 years + 468 m3/s 6 Q100 years 7 Q100 years + 1000 m3/s 8 Q100 years + 1500 m3/s 9 Q100 years + 2000 m3/s    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  72  What climate information is presented and how  should it be interpreted? Table 8 presents nine synthetic scenarios that were  derived to simulate increases in river discharge  along the North Shore of Montreal Island. Figure  28 presents a map of the maximum area (in pink)  that would be affected by a flood of the magnitude  simulated by one of the scenarios presented in  Table 8, namely a discharge equivalent to Q100 +  2000m3/s.   How is the table/figure constructed? Nine synthetic scenarios of future discharge  values were used to simulate a range of flooding  events (Table 8). The discharges used were  based on hydrological modelling of measured  discharge values for the river. Plausible scenarios  of increases in discharge were based on both  historical discharge values and expert opinions by  hydrologists working on the project. Examples of  simulated values were: Q2 (maximum discharge  with a 2 year return period), Q100 (discharge with  a 100 year return), and Q100 + 2000m3/s. Once  the scenarios were developed, they were used to  project water levels on a digital elevation map of  the area of interest. The goal was to model different  discharge overflow scenarios in order to identify  areas most likely to be submerged (potential flood  zones). These scenarios allowed the development  of a map of the potential flood zones (e.g. Figure  28) and ultimately permitted a first evaluation of  the sensitivity of the populations to increases in  future discharge.   What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways  to misinterpret the information? Synthetic scenarios can be a useful approach in  evaluating different possible futures in impacts  and adaptation studies. Some of the main  advantages of this type of scenarios are that they  can help identify sensitivities in the system, they  are quickly and easily constructed (i.e. do not  require major computational resources), and they  are typically easy to use and understand. In this  case, mapping flood zones needed to be modeled  into the future and while the extent of flooding  is obviously highly dependent on the discharge  of the river, this river is regulated and so water  discharge is a complex variable to simulate. This  complexity is heightened by climate change.  Indeed, while precipitation will explain a large  portion of the variability in the discharge, other  factors which are more difficult to model may  also play a role, such as water uptake from the  river upstream of the region of interest and other  management decisions regarding flow regulations  for example. The decision to use what-if scenarios  therefore allowed a first evaluation of potential  vulnerabilities of populations along this river.   However, an important disadvantage is that  synthetic scenarios may not be physically plausible  and may not represent the physical properties  of the climate system. For example, some of the  future discharge values used may be very large  compared to what can actually occur. Synthetic  scenarios must therefore be constructed with  care with the help of experts and their underlying  assumptions must clearly be outlined.      DECISION MAKING USING CLIMATE  INFORMATION  CHAPTER FOUR     75  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Understanding climate information is a foundation step in making well-informed decisions in the face of climate change.  However, climate information is only one of many aspects that must be considered in a decision-making  process. Numerous other factors, such as demographic changes, technological advances and tolerance to  risk, to name a few, also play critical roles9. While it is beyond the scope of this guide to detail the adaptation  decision-making process, key messages relevant to the information presented in this guidebook include:  1.  Decision-makers routinely deal with many different sources of uncertainty concerning the future, aside  from the fact that the climate or the weather is also changing. Variables such as demographic changes,  economic growth and many others, impact the way decisions are made, but do not prevent long-term  decisions such as investing in major infrastructure or protecting areas from development. Lessons learned  from decision-making in the face of these other uncertainties can help inform the decision-making process  under a changing climate.  2.  Climate information should never be the sole basis upon which decisions are made but instead must  be used in combination with other  decision-support  tools  such as cost-benefit, multi-criteria analyses or  hazard mapping tools. Including a range of factors will help ensure that decisions are robust and more readily  implemented. Such analysis will help recognize adaptation measures that may be theoretically attractive but  that could generate undesired impacts, may not be economically viable or do not have enough public support  to be put in place.  3.  There is no such thing as the best climate scenario. The range of results obtained from a large number  of climate simulations must be used to guide decisions. This spread in climate model results informs the  decision-maker on the probable outcomes from worse to best given the current state of knowledge.  One way that the range in climate model results feeds into an effective decision-making framework is through  the use of a sensitivity analysis that allows decision-makers to assess the consequences of each alternative  future. The goal is to evaluate the impacts associated with the range of different climate scenarios and assess  how adaptation measures perform in the face of this range of plausible futures. Different approaches can be  used to conduct a sensitivity analysis, such as:   › estimating the consequences of each alternative future;   › identifying climate scenarios under which a given policy or adaptation measure would fail and what the    consequences might be;   › using the full range of available scenarios to determine which adaptation measures will perform well    regardless of the magnitude or intensity of the expected climate change – these are often referred to as    no-regret measures.  Scenario planning represents another way to consider the uncertainties. In this approach, initial common  steps are identified for a number of different possible solutions that do not confine the results to only one  end point, but rather leave many options open. Critical milestones can be used to reassess the adaptation  measures in light of the best available science, and adjustments to plans made as required.  4.  Decision-making in a changing world implies that an iterative risk management approach should be  prioritized. Decisions must be re-evaluated and adjusted as new knowledge about both climatic and non- climatic variables becomes available. Monitoring and learning should be an important part of the process.      CASE STUDIES OF CLIMATE INFORMATION  USE IN ADAPTATION  CHAPTER FIVE     GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  78  Region: Eight resource regions of British Columbia,  namely the Cariboo, Kootenay-Boundary, Northeast,  Omineca, Skeena, South Coast, Thompson-Okanagan,  and West Coast.  Summary and Application: The summaries were  produced with the support of the BC Ministry of  Forestry, Lands and Natural Resource Operations,  as part of PCIC’s ongoing mission to help regional  stakeholders in British Columbia plan for projected  changes to climate.   The summaries describe climate change projections for  each region in the context of historical observations and  province-wide climate change. Each summary begins  with a brief, general overview of climate change in  BC and a short discussion of the topography, climate  influences, ecosystems and economies of the region.   The summaries present the historical temperature and  precipitation trends of the regions using both summary  tables and evolution figures. Projected changes of a  number of climatic variables, such as temperature,  precipitation, snowfall, growing degree-days, heating   degree-days, and frost-free days, are also given for the  2050 horizon in a table format. These projections are  reproduced from Plan2Adapt.ca, PCIC’s web platform  for basic climate projections.    In addition to highlighting historical trends and  the future projections, the summaries also outline  key impacts that may be felt by various sectors,  infrastructure and ecosystems.  The information presented in the summaries has  been used by the Government of British Columbia to  present a portrait of the climate to decision-makers and  planners of the province. By giving a general overview  of the evolution of the climate over the past 100 years  and of the projected changes over the next 50 years,  the information can be used to start a dialogue about  the impacts that have already been felt by different  actors of the sector and to begin a reflection on possible  future impacts.   Website: http://www.pacificclimate.org/resources/ publications  Project Title: Regional Climate Summaries Series produced by the Pacific Climate Impacts    Consortium (PCIC)   BASIC INFORMATION  Region: Montreal’s borough of Rosemont – La Petite- Patrie  Summary and Application: This borough is densely  built and subject to significant heat island effects.  This phenomenon occurs in cities where ambient air  temperatures tend to be hotter than in surrounding  areas due to the high percentage of dark surfaces (such  as tar roofs and asphalt roads), the amount of heat- retaining (namely concrete) buildings that cool more  slowly than the surrounding air, and limited vegetated  areas.    In order to combat this problem, the borough council  revised its zoning bylaw in April 2011 to include the  following four regulatory measures: (1) when replacing  an existing roof or constructing a new building, the  owner must install either a green roof or a highly  reflective roof; (2) for all new parking lots of 10 or more  spaces, at least 15 percent of the area must be open   ground landscaped with plants, bushes and trees; (3) all  new paving materials must meet a minimum specified  surface reflectivity rating; and (4) when constructing a  new building, at least 20 percent of the building site  must remain open ground and be landscaped with  plants, bushes and trees.   This example highlights the fact that complex climate  information is not always required in order to  implement adaptation measures. Indeed, basic climate  information, such as recent past trends and projected  changes in temperatures are sufficient in this case to  appreciate that the issue of urban heat islands is most  likely going to become increasingly important in the  future.  Webs i te :http://v i l le .montrea l .qc .ca/porta l/ page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_ schema=PORTAL See also : Richardson and Otero  (2012)55   Project Title: Rosemont – La Petite-Patrie’s zoning bylaw to reduce the urban heat island    effect.  http://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/governments/organizational-structure/ministries-organizations/ministries/forest-and-natural-resource-operations http://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/governments/organizational-structure/ministries-organizations/ministries/forest-and-natural-resource-operations http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL   79  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Region: Southern Quebec  Summary and Application: Researchers involved in  this project sought to explore the potential risks of  certain crop pests through an evaluation of analogue  regions56. More specifically, the aim was to identify  spatial analogues further south in the United States  that corresponded to different administrative regions in  Quebec in order to examine which pests were already  present in the analogue regions and what adaptation  measures had been taken to combat associated  problems. The analogues were based on growing  season length, growing degree-days, and precipitation  during the growing season.   Two main enemies of crops were investigated. The  first was the Fusarium head blight (F. graminearum),  a disease of wheat, which renders the grain unsuitable  for human and animal consumption. This disease has  been on the rise in southern Canada and has caused  important economic losses in many regions57. For this  disease, it was found that Pennsylvania was a good  climate analogue for the Bas-Saint-Laurent region in  2050. Based on this information, researchers have   begun to explore adaptation measures adopted by  the state of Pennsylvania, such as relying on different  strains that mature at different times throughout the  summer, to combat this potential problem in the Bas- Saint-Laurent. The second problem was the corn borer  (O. nubilalis), an insect that causes important damage  to crops of sweet corn, which is destined for human  consumption. Regarding this insect, it was found that  the climate in the Montérégie may become more  similar to the recent climate of Illinois. In this state, the  insect has a more rapid growth rate than in Quebec  and represents one of the most important sweet corn  diseases56.  The results of this project initiated a revision of the  surveillance strategies and norms in Quebec. The  project was the subject of an article in a local Montreal  newspaper (La Presse, Allard, June 10, 2013), which  serves to illustrate how attractive this analogue format  is for communicating the challenges of climate change.   Website:A French copy of the report can be found at:   http://www.ouranos.ca/fr/publications   Project Title: The impacts of climate change on the synchronicity between pests and their    natural enemies: implications for the biological fight of the agriculture sector    in Quebec.  INTERMEDIATE INFORMATION  http://www.ouranos.ca/fr/publications    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  80  Project Title: Planning for climate change adaptation: lessons learned from a community-   based workshop.  Region: City of Prince George, British Columbia  Climate information used: Climate normals, climate  evolution and trends, graphs and maps of projected  future changes.   Summary and Application: The overall goal of this  project was to provide an analysis of historical and  projected changes in the hydro-climatology for the  Prince George region. This information produced by the  Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) was meant as  a tool to inform the public, municipal officers, planners,  and researchers of the potential risks, vulnerabilities  and opportunities of climate change in this region58.  The city was given information on both historical  normals and trends along with future projections for  temperature and precipitation. This allowed an analysis  of the strong natural climate variability observed in  that region, due in part to the effects of El Niño, the  Southern Oscillation, and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation.  The magnitude of projected changes could then be  compared with this variability. The results informed  the City of Prince George that important changes in  temperature and precipitation were projected, which  were likely to have important impacts on many factors,  such as flood risks, forest fires, water supply, and  transportation infrastructure, to name a few.   This climate information was presented at two  workshops in Prince George, which allowed the  city officials a valuable opportunity to visualize the  information, to digest it and importantly, to address  questions directly to the climate scientist who had  produced the information59 Based on this information,  they could then discuss specific impacts and explore  adaptation options for the city.  The outcome of these exercises was the development  of an adaptation strategy for the City of Prince George,  where top adaptation priorities were identified along  with potential actions to address them. Workshops and  discussions between city officials and climate scientists  also helped identify additional climate information and  analysis needed to improve city planning, notably in  terms of infrastructure and emergency planning.   Website: A copy of the report can be found at:  http://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/ publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge. Aug2009.pdf  For a copy of a journal article on the project: DOI:  10.1016/j.envsci.2011.12.011  http://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.Aug2 http://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.Aug2 http://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.Aug2   81  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Project Title: Study of storm patterns in Nunavik   Region: Nunavik  Summary and Application: The objective of this study  was to evaluate the impacts of climate change on  coastal maritime infrastructures for seven villages in  the Nunavik region60. More specifically, the goal was  to study the impacts of storms and oceanic processes  on premiums (water levels higher than the predicted  tide) and on strong wave development. Both regional  and global climate models were used to simulate storm  characteristics, such as the number of events, their  speed, and their trajectories. Projected changes in  these large systems, namely in the periodicity of storm  events, are predicted to have important impacts on  coastal environments.   Generally, the study results lead to a better  understanding of the processes responsible for the  creation and maintenance of large systems over Hudson  Bay. This includes the links between their occurrences  and their impact on the development of waves and  premiums, which are responsible for damage to coastal  infrastructures.    This study also serves as an example of how results may  be valuable to decision-makers despite some obvious  limitations, such as the restricted number of climate  simulations and associated increased uncertainty.  The overall patterns in the changes for example are  consistent for all simulations. This in itself is information  that decision-makers can retrieve from the study.  As for the uncertainties in the projections given, this  information can be combined with other information,  such as the vulnerability assessments of populations  or infrastructures (where for example resilience  thresholds can be identified) in order to better evaluate  the urgency of putting adaptation measures in place.   Website: A French copy of this report can obtained by  contacting Ouranos.   DETAILED INFORMATION  Project Title: Development of a warning system prototype for low flows and excessive    water withdrawals on the Yamaska River watershed  Region: Southern Quebec  Summary and Application: The global objective of the  project was to raise awareness of both the public and  decision-makers to current low flow vulnerabilities and  the misuse of water during summer periods. A second  goal was to assess the impacts of climate change on low  flows in order to start developing adaptation strategies.  The project involved the construction of a website  where real-time river discharges and 7-day forecasts  can be consulted and compared to low flow indices  during the summer period. The project proposed to link  each low flow index to a set of water use restriction  measures. Selected cities along the Yamaska watershed  remain free to implement the restrictions when the  flow falls below these indices.   Real-time river flow data are measured by the Centre  d’Expertise Hydrique du Québec while the forecast  and the low flows indices are based on observed  discharge data. The impacts of climate change on future  discharges were assessed by importing the outputs of   regional climate models into the hydrological model  Hydrotel, an impact model. The results show that  longer and more severe low flows are expected for this  watershed in the future (over the 2050 horizon, 2041- 2070).    This project is a good example of how to introduce  climate model data in projects at the municipal  government level. While the issue of water management  has been an important one for the watershed-based  organization of this river, this project is bringing the  issue to a larger audience. More specifically, the  warning system prototype is used to raise awareness  and to make a better use of the resource. The climate  change assessment results will be helpful in speeding  up the adaptation process on the watershed.   Website: A French copy of this report can obtained by  contacting Ouranos.       GLOSSARY    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  84  Adaptation: Initiatives and measures to reduce the vulnerability of natural and human systems against ac- tual or expected climate change impacts.  Adaptive capacity: A system’s ability to implement adaptation measures to climate change (including climate  variability and extremes).  Aerosols: A collection of airborne solid and liquid particles that reside in the atmosphere for at least several  hours. They can be either natural or anthropogenic in origin and may influence the climate in several ways:  directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and indirectly through acting as cloud and ice condensa- tion nuclei which impact the optical properties and lifetime of clouds.  Analogues: Climate analogues are a type of climate scenario constructed by identifying a recorded climate  regime that resembles the future climate of a region of interest. The climate regimes can be obtained from  the past (temporal analogues) or from another region in the present (spatial analogues).  Anomalies: Anomalies represent the difference between the value of a climate variable for a given year or  season and the average value of the reference period.  Baseline: See reference period. A measurable quantity from which alternative outcomes can be estimated.  Boundary organization: Organizations that facilitate the exchange of knowledge between science and policy.  Change fields: See Deltas  Climate adaptation: The process that leads to a reduction in harm or risk of harm, or the realization of bene- fits, associated with climate variability and climate change.  Climate change: Long-term continuous increase or decrease to climatic variables (such as 30 year averages  of temperature and precipitation).  Climate information: This term is used in the guidebook to refer to climatic data that describe either past  conditions, obtained from meteorological stations, or the future, obtained from the outputs of climate mo- dels.  Climate model: A numerical representation of the climate system based on the physical, chemical, and biolo- gical properties of its components, their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for all or some  of its known properties.  Climate normals: The average of weather conditions as obtained from observations for a historical 30-year  time interval defines «typical» conditions for a given area. Note that climate normals are typically given for  the time span that corresponds to the reference period.  Climate projection: Projections represent the future portion of climate model simulations. They are based  on assumptions such as those concerning future socioeconomic and technological developments that may  or may not be realized and thus are subject to uncertainty.   Climate scenario: A coherent and internally-consistent description of the evolution in the climate for a given  time period in the future, using a specific modelling technique and under specific assumptions about the  evolution of greenhouse gas emissions and other factors that may influence the climate in the future. Cli- mate projections serve as the raw material for constructing climate scenarios, but climate scenarios usually  require additional information such as observed current climate.  Climate service providers: An organization that supplies climate information to users. The roles of these  organizations may include providing historical climate data, running climate simulations, and tailoring their  outputs to suit the needs of individual users.    85  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Climate simulation: Climate simulations represent the outcome of running a climate model for a certain  period of time. The time span of a simulation can range from a few years to thousands of years and will ite- ratively be computed at intervals of a few minutes. They are run for both the past and the future.  Climate statistic: Any statistics used to describe the state of the climate system or of one of its components.  Examples include mean values, the occurrence or frequency of extremes and standard deviations.  Climate variability: The variations above or below a long-term mean state of the climate. This variability can  be due to natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability) or to variations in anthro- pogenic external forcing (external variability).  Consensus: The term is used to refer to agreement between models. It represents the proportion of members  of a simulation ensemble that ‘agree’ with the sign (whether positive or negative) of the projected change.  Delta: The relative change for a climate variable between the future and baseline or reference period, as  simulated by a climate model.  Downscaling: A method that allows climate model output to be delivered over a finer resolution than the  one generally obtained from global climate models. Two different approaches are prioritized: statistical  downscaling and dynamical downscaling (see Section 4 for more detail on each method).  Emission scenario: A plausible representation of the future development of emission of substances that are  potentially radiatively active in the atmosphere, such as greenhouse gases and aerosols). They are based on  assumptions regarding driving forces like demographic and socioeconomic development, or technological  change.  Ensemble: The term ensemble is used in this guidebook to refer to the complete set of climate simulations  or scenarios that is used for a particular study. It is used synonymously with the term multimodel ensemble.  Note, however, that other, more restrictive, definitions exist (for example, an ensemble could represent a set  of simulations made with the same climate model, using the same emissions scenario, but initialized using  different starting conditions).  Global Climate Model (GCM): Computer model that is a mathematical representation of the climate system,  based on equations that drive the physical processes governing the climate, including the role of the atmos- phere, hydrosphere, biosphere, etc. It represents a unique tool that helps reproduce a complex ensemble of  processes relevant for climate evolution. Note the term Global Circulation Model is often used as a synonym.   Greenhouse gases (GHG): Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that  absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths and that cause the greenhouse effect. Primary greenhouse  gases include water vapour (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone  (O3).  Grid (grid points): Discrete model «cells» which represent computational units of a climate model. The simp- lest model grids typically divide the globe (or model domain) into constant angular grid spacing (i.e. a lati- tude / longitude grid). A climate model’s horizontal resolution is often expressed as the size of a single grid  cell (e.g. 1° x 1° grid or 10 km by 10 km grid).  Horizon: A future time period of interest over which the outputs of climate simulations are examined or for  which future scenarios are produced. The climate science community tends to converge on common time  horizons that are recommended by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The horizons typically  encompass a 30- or 20- year period. For example, horizon 2050 often corresponds to the years 2041-2070.  Index: The term (climate) index is used to refer to properties of the climate that are not measured in the field  or calculated by climate models but rather that are calculated or derived from more basic climate variables  such as temperature and precipitation. Examples include the number of growing degree-days, freeze-thaw  cycles, and the drought code index. (see Variable).    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  86  Mitigation: Technological change or substitution that reduces greenhouse gas sources and emissions and  that enhance sinks of GHG.  Natural variability: Component of the overall uncertainty that stems from the inherent unpredictability and  apparent randomness of the climate. It is characterized by monitoring observations and can be studied by  the initial conditions of an ensemble.  No regret (adaptation) option: Adaptation measure that would be the most justified under all plausible  future scenarios.  Normals: See Climate normals  Polygon: See Grid  Radiative forcing: The change in the net, downward minus upward, irradiance (expressed in Watts per square  metre) at the tropopause due to a change in an external driver of climate change; for example, a change in  the concentration of carbon dioxide or the output from the Sun.  Range: The term range is used to represent the spectrum of output data from an ensemble of simulations  or scenarios.  Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP): Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concen- trations of the full suite of greenhouse gases and aerosols as well as chemically active gases, and land use.  The word representative signifies that each RCP provides only one of many possible scenarios that would  lead to the specific radiative forcing characteristics. Four RCPs were selected as the basis for the climate pro- jections used in the Fifth Assessment Report published by the IPCC.   Reanalysis: Reanalyses are estimates of historical atmospheric and oceanic temperatures, wind, current, and  other meteorological and oceanographic quantities, created by processing past meteorological and oceano- graphic data using fixed state-of-the-art weather forecasting models and data assimilation techniques. They  allow the analysis of numerous climatic variables and are also used to validate RCMs and GCMs in the current  climate and to drive RCM simulations.  Reference period: In practice, it often refers to a period of time from the recent past used in the produc- tion of climate scenarios. Future period values produced by climate models are compared with those from  this period to evaluate changes. The WMO recommends 30-year intervals as reference periods, such as  1971-2000; however there are exceptions. For example, the current reference period used by the IPCC is  1985-2005. A synonymous term is baseline period. Accordingly, the terms ‘reference scenario’ or ‘baseline  scenario’ are used to refer to climate scenarios for a reference period.  Regional Climate Model (RCM): Just like a GCM, the regional climate model is a mathematical representa- tion of the climate system, based on equations describing the physical processes governing the climate. This  includes processes and characteristics of the atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere, and bios- phere. RCMs have a finer resolution than (GCMs). RCMs are typically ‘limited domain’ models meaning that  they cover only a portion of the globe.  Resilience: The ability of a social or ecological system to absorb disturbances while retaining the same basic  structure and functions, and the capacity to recover from an impact that may have caused harm.  Resolution: In climate models, this term refers to the physical distance (metres or degrees) between each  point on the grid used to compute the equations. Temporal resolution refers to the time step or time elapsed  between each model computation of the equations. See Grid    87  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  Return period: The expected mean time between occurrences that equal or exceed a particular threshold. It  is often used to express the frequency of occurrence of an event (freq = 1/return period).  Risk: The likelihood (probability of occurrence) of an event occurring and its impact or consequence where  the outcome is uncertain.  Risk assessment: The process by which hazards and consequences are identified, characterized either qua- litatively or quantitatively.  Scenario: See Climate scenario  Sensitivity: The change that results (in a variable or a system) from a specific perturbation in a parameter,  input or assumption. Climate sensitivity is the degree by which a system would be affected, either benefi- cially or adversely, by climate-related stimuli (e.g. radiative forcing). For example, the sensitivity of a climate  model could be estimated by calculating its projected increases in temperature for a given increase in CO2  concentration  Scale -Spatial and temporal: Climate may vary on a range of spatial and temporal scales. Spatial scale many  range from local (such as a city), through regional (such as a province) to continental or global. Temporal  scales may range from monthly, to seasonal to geological for example.   SRES scenarios: The term stands for Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. They are emission scenarios  developed by Nakičenovič and Swart (2000) and used, among others, as the basis for some of the climate  projections used in the Fourth Assessment Report published by the IPCC. Synthetic scenario: A way of constructing future climates without relying on climate models. The scenarios  are built by adjusting meteorological parameters in a time series by incremental amounts, which are loosely  based on either GCM outputs, past climate reconstructions, or expert opinion.  Uncertainty: An expression of the degree to which a value (e.g. the future state of the climate system) is  unknown. Uncertainty can result from lack of information or from disagreement about what is known or  even knowable. It can have many types of sources, from quantifiable errors in data to ambiguously defined  concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour.  Variable: The term climate variable is used to refer to a variable that can be measured directly in the field (at  meteorological stations for example) or that is calculated by climate models. (See Index)  Variability: See Climate variability  Vintage: The term vintage is used in the guide to refer to global climate model ensembles that are issued  from one particular Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, such as CMIP3 and CMIP5.  Vulnerability: The degree to which is system is susceptible to, and unable to cope with, adverse effects of  climate change. It is a function of the character, magnitude and rate of change to which a system is exposed  and the sensitivity and adaptive capacity of that system.    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  88  References for this glossary:  IPCC, 2013: Annex III: Glossary [Planton, S. (ed.)]. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contri- bution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley  (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.  IPCC, 2014: Annex XX: Glossary [Agard, J., E.L.F. Schipper, J. Birkmann, M. Campos, C. Dubeux, Y. Nojiri, L. Ols- son, B. Osman-Elasha, M. Pelling, M.J. Prather, M.G. Rivera-Ferre, O.C. Ruppel, A. Sallenger, K.R. Smith, A.L.  St. Clair, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, and T.E. Bilir (eds.)]. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,  and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report  of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea,  K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. Mac- Cracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom  and New York, NY, USA.  Nakičenovič, N., and R. Swart (eds.), 2000: Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. A Special Report of Wor- king Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 599 pp.     EXAMPLES OF WHERE TO FIND CLIMATE  INFORMATION    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  90  Note that this list is not meant as an exhaustive enumeration of Canadian climate service providers but  rather to provide different examples of what can be found on the web. In addition, while the list only includes  public providers, we recognize that private organizations can also provide valuable support to users.  Environment Canada National Climate Data and Information Archive http://climate.weather.gc.ca/index_e.html  Homogenized climate dataset This site provides homogenized climate data for many climatological stations in Canada for temperature,  precipitation, surface pressure, and wind. http://www.ec.gc.ca/dccha-ahccd/Default.asp?lang=En&n=B1F8423A-1  Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis This site provides information on Canadian global and regional models along with plots of future projections. www.cccma.ec.gc.ca  Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (CCCSN) This site provides various formats for visualizing future climate scenarios for Canada. www.cccsn.ec.gc.ca  Recent climate trends This site summarizes recent climate data and presents it in a historical context. http://www.ec.gc.ca/adsc-cmda/  The Canadian Regional Climate Model (MRCC) http://www.ec.gc.ca/ccmac-cccma/default.asp?lang=En&n=82DD0FCC-1  Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium Plan2Adapt This Web site generates maps, plots and data describing projected future climate conditions for British Co- lumbia. http://www.plan2adapt.ca/  Government of Québec – Développement durable, Environnement et Lutte contre les changements clima- tiques Climate surveillance This site provides data on climatic normals (1981-2010), temperature trends (1961-2010) as well as daily  climate data for the province of Quebec. http://www.mddelcc.gouv.qc.ca/climat/surveillance/index.asp  North American Regional Climate Change Assessment Program (NARCCAP) This program is dedicated to the production of high resolution climate simulations over North America. http://www.narccap.ucar.edu/about/index.html     REFERENCES    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  92  14. Lemos, M. C. & Morehouse, B. J. The co- production of science and policy in integrated  climate assessments. Glob. Environ. Chang. 15,  57–68 (2005).  15. Lockwood, M., Harrison, R. G., Woollings,  T. & Solanki, S. K. Are cold winters in Europe  associated with low solar activity? Environ. Res.  Lett. 5, 024001 (2010).  16. Scaife, A. A., Knight, J. R., Vallis, G. K. &  Folland, C. K. A stratospheric influence on the  winter NAO and North Atlantic surface climate.  Geophys. Res. Lett. 32, L18715 (2005).  17. Sutton, R. T. & Hodson, D. L. R. Atlantic  Ocean forcing of North American and European  summer climate. Science (80-. ). 309, 115–8  (2005).  18. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC). Climate Change 2007 : Synthesis  Report. Change 446, (Cambridge University Press,  2007).  19. IPCC. CLIMATE CHANGE 2013 The Physical  Science Basis. (2013).  20. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC). Special Report on Emissions  Scenarios. (Cambridge University Press, 2000).  21. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC). Climate Change 2001: Synthesis  Report. Summary for Policymakers. Assessment  (2001). at <http://www.grida.no/publications/ other/ipcc_tar/?src=/CLIMATE/IPCC_TAR/vol4/ english/index.htm>  22. Rogelj, J., Meinshausen, M. & Knutti, R.  Global warming under old and new scenarios  using IPCC climate sensitivity range estimates.  Nat. Clim. Chang. 2, 248–253 (2012).  23. Knutti, R. & Sedláček, J. Robustness and  uncertainties in the new CMIP5 climate model  projections. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3, 369–373 (2012).  24. Knutti, R., Masson, D. & Gettelman, A.  Climate model genealogy: Generation CMIP5 and  how we got there. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 1194– 1199 (2013).  1. Feenstra, J., Burton, I., Smith, J. B. & Tol,  R. S. J. Handbook on Methods for Climate Change  Impact Assessment and Adaptation Strategies.  (1998).  2. Burton, I., Huq, S., Lim, B., Pilifosova, O.  & Schipper, E. L. From impacts assessment to  adaptation priorities: the shaping of adaptation  policy. Clim. Policy 2, 145–159 (2002).  3. Carter, T. . General guidelines on the use  of scenario data for climate impact and adaptation  assessment- Version 2. (2007).  4. Bizikova, L., Neale, T. & Burton, I.  Canadian communities’ guidebook for adaptation  to climate change. Including an approach to  generate mitigation co-benefits in the context of  sustainable development. (Environment Canada  and University of British Columbia, 2008).  5. Pearce, C. Pathways to climate resilience :  A guidebook for forest-based communities.  (2008).  6. OCCIAR. A Practitioner ’ s Guide to Climate  Change Adaptation in Ontario ’ s Ecosystems.  (2011). at <www.climateontario.ca>  7. OCCIAR. Adaptation Planning in Eastern  Ontario. (2012). at <www.climateontario.ca>  8. ICLEI. Changing Climate , Changing  Communities : Guide and Workbook for Municipal  Climate Adaptation. (2010).  9. IPCC. FINAL DRAFT IPCC WGII AR5 Chapter  2. (2014).  10. Smit, B. & Wandel, J. Adaptation, adaptive  capacity and vulnerability. Glob. Environ. Chang.  16, 282–292 (2006).  11. Willows, R. I. & Connel, R. K. (Eds. . Climate  adaptation : Risk , uncertainty and decision- making. (2003).  12. Parson, E. A. Useful global-change  scenarios: current issues and challenges. Environ.  Res. Lett. 3, 5pp (2008).  13. Lemos, M. C. & Rood, R. B. Climate  projections and their impact on policy and  practice. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Clim. Chang. 1,  670–682 (2010).    93  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  36. Mote, P., Brekke, L. & Duffy, P. Guidelines  for Constructing Climate Scenarios. (2007).  doi:10.1007/s00703 37. Murdock, T. Q. & Spittlehouse, D. L.  Selecting and Using Climate Change Scenarios for  British Columbia. Environment (2011).  38. Casajus, N. et al. An Objective Approach  to Select Climate Scenarios when Projecting  Species Distribution under Climate Change. PLoS  One 1–17 (2016). doi:10.5061/dryad.1sf74  39. Mearns, L. O. et al. Guidelines for Use  of Climate Scenarios Developed from Regional  Climate Model Experiments. (2003).  40. Themeßl, M. J., Gobiet, A. & Heinrich,  G. Empirical-statistical downscaling and error  correction of regional climate models and its  impact on the climate change signal. Clim. Change  112, 449–468 (2011).  41. Mpelasoka, F. S. & Chiew, F. H. S. Influence  of Rainfall Scenario Construction Methods on  Runoff Projections. J. Hydrometeorol. 10, 1168– 1183 (2009).  42. Gennaretti, F., Sangelantoni, L. &  Grenier, P. Toward daily climate scenarios for  Canadian Arctic coastal zones with more realistic  temperature-precipitation interdependence.  J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 11862–11877 (2015).  doi:10.1002/2015JD023890.Received  43. Lu, X. Guidance on the Development of  Regional Climate scenarios for Vulnerability and  Adaptation Assessments. (2006).  44. Hutchinson, M. F. et al. Development  and Testing of Canada-Wide Interpolated  Spatial Models of Daily Minimum–Maximum  Temperature and Precipitation for 1961–2003. J.  Appl. Meteorol. Climatol. 48, 725–741 (2009).  45. McKenney, D. W. et al. Customized Spatial  Climate Models for North America. Bull. Am.  Meteorol. Soc. 92, 1611–1622 (2011).  46. Mekis, É. & Vincent, L. a. An Overview  of the Second Generation Adjusted Daily  Precipitation Dataset for Trend Analysis in Canada.  Atmosphere-Ocean 49, 163–177 (2011).  25. Markovic, M., Elía, R., Frigon, A. &  Matthews, H. D. A transition from CMIP3 to CMIP5  for climate information providers: the case of  surface temperature over eastern North America.  Clim. Change 120, 197–210 (2013).  26. McSweeney, C. F. & Jones, R. G. No  consensus on consensus: the challenge of finding  a universal approach to measuring and mapping  ensemble consistency in GCM projections. Clim.  Change 119, 617–629 (2013).  27. Sheffield, J. et al. North American Climate  in CMIP5 Experiments. Part I: Evaluation of  Historical Simulations of Continental and Regional  Climatology*. J. Clim. 26, 9209–9245 (2013).  28. Sheffield, J. et al. North American Climate  in CMIP5 Experiments. Part II: Evaluation of  Historical Simulations of Intraseasonal to Decadal  Variability. J. Clim. 26, 9247–9290 (2013).  29. Gleckler, P. J., Taylor, K. E. & Doutriaux,  C. Performance metrics for climate models. J.  Geophys. Res. 113, D06104 (2008).  30. Hawkins, E. & Sutton, R. The Potential  to Narrow Uncertainty in Regional Climate  Predictions. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 90, 1095– 1107 (2009).  31. Hawkins, E. Our evolving climate :  communicating the effects of climate variability.  Weather 66, 175–179 (2011).  32. Hawkins, E. & Sutton, R. The potential  to narrow uncertainty in projections of regional  precipitation change. Clim. Dyn. 37, 407–418  (2011).  33. Smith, D. M. et al. Improved surface  temperature prediction for the coming decade  from a global climate model. Science (80-. ). 317,  796–9 (2007).  34. Cox, P. & Stephenson, D. Climate change.  A changing climate for prediction. Science 317,  207–8 (2007).  35. Knutti, R. et al. A Review of Uncertainties in  Global Temperature Projections over the Twenty- First Century. J. Clim. 21, 2651–2663 (2008).    GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  94  58. Picketts, I. M., Werner, A. T. & Murdock, T.  Q. Climate Change in Prince George - Summary of  past trends and future projections. (2009). 59. Picketts, I. M. et al. Planning for climate  change adaptation: lessons learned from a  community-based workshop. Environ. Sci. Policy  17, 82–93 (2012). 60. Savard, J. et al. Étude du régime des  tempêtes dans le Nunavik. (2013).  47. Ramirez-Vlillegas, J. et al. Climate  Analogues : Finding tomorrow’s agriculture today.  (2011).  48. Grenier, P., Parent, A.-C., Huard, D.,  Anctil, F. & Chaumont, D. An Assessment of Six  Dissimilarity Metrics for Climate Analogs. J. Appl.  Meteorol. Climatol. 52, 733–752 (2013).  49. Veloz, S. et al. Identifying climatic analogs  for Wisconsin under 21st-century climate-change  scenarios. Clim. Change 112, 1037–1058 (2011).  50. Williams, J. W., Jackson, S. T. & Kutzbach,  J. E. Projected distributions of novel and  disappearing climates by 2100 AD. Proc. Natl.  Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 5738–42 (2007).  51. Kopf, S., Ha-Duong, M. & Hallegatte,  S. Using maps of city analogues to display and  interpret climate change scenarios and their  uncertainty. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 8, 905– 918 (2008).  52. Ford, J. D. et al. Case study and analogue  methodologies in climate change vulnerability  research. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Clim. Chang. 1,  374–392 (2010).  53. Centre d’expertise hydrique du Québec  (CEHQ). Atlas hydroclimatique du Québec  méridional. 51 (2013).  54. Thomas, I. et al. Analyser la vulnérabilité  sociétale et territoriale aux inondations en  milieu urbain dans le contexte des changements  climatiques, en prenant comme cas d’étude la  Ville de Montréal. (2012).  55. Richardson, G. R. A. & Otero, J. Land use  planning tools for local adaptation to climate  change. (2012).  56. Gagnon, A.-E. et al. Études de cas pour  faciliter une gestion efficace des ennemis des  cultures dans le contexte de l ’ augmentation des  risques phytosanitaires liés aux changements  climatiques. (2013).  57. Chakraborty, S. & Newton, A. C. Climate  change, plant diseases and food security: an  overview. Plant Pathol. 60, 2–14 (2011).    CONSORTIUM ON REGIONAL CLIMATOLOGY AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE    INTRODUCTION   The Need for This Guide  Defining Adaptation and Decision-maker  Target audience   Objectives   HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE   CHAPTER ONE   1.1 NATURAL CLIMATE VARIABILITY  1.2 NATURAL CLIMATE VARIABILITY  1.3 CLIMATE MODELS   1.4 EMISSIONs scenarios  1.5 Climate simulations  1.6 Climate projections  1.6.1 Coupled MoDEL INTERCOMPARAISON PROJECT (CMIP)  1.7 Sources of Uncertainty in climate projections  1.8 Simulation ensemble  1.9 Downscaling techniques  1.9.1 WHEN IS Downscaling NECESSARY  1.9.2 DYNAMICAL OR STATISTICAL DOWNSCALING  1.10 Post-processing techniques  1.10.1 Delta/scaling method (also called the perturbation method)  1.10.2 Bias correction  1.11 Post-processing techniques  1.11.1 REFERENCE PERIOD AND FUTURE HORIZONS  1.11.2 Constructing climate scenarios   CHAPTER TWO   2.1 CLIMATE INFORMATION CATEGORIES  2.2 CLIMATE INFORMATION FORMATS   CHAPTER THREE   BASIC CATEGORY  1.  SYNTHESIS TABLE   2.  CLIMATE NORMALS  3.  HISTORICAL TRENDS  4.  MAPS OF DELTA CHANGES    INTERMEDIATE CATEGORY  1.  SPATIAL ANALOGUE  2.  SCATTER PLOT  3.  FUTURE VALUES  4.  EVOLUTION OF FUTURE VALUES  5.  CUMULATIVE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION    DETAILED CATEGORY  1.  TEMPORAL SERIES  2.  Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves (analysis of extremes)   3.  Analysis of limited confidence variables – the choice between synthetic scenarios or climate model scenarios    CHAPTER FOUR   CHAPTER FIVE   BASIC INFORMATION  INTERMEDIATE INFORMATION  DETAILED INFORMATION    GLOSSARY  EXAMPLES  REFERENCES  Figure 1 |  Steps of a climate change adaptation framework.   Figure 2 |  Example of the natural variability in annual mean temperatures, as well as 10 and 30 year moving averages,   without the effect of a long-term trend (such as would be produced under a climate signal with increases in   GHG).    Figure 3 |  Time-series of annual temperature over Quebec, as simulated by the Canadian Regional Climate Model,   along with trend lines for a relatively A. short period and B. longer period that highlight the fact that short-  term trends may not reflect  Figure 4 |  Interactions described by climate models (left panel) and an example of the discrete grids used to compart  mentalize the climate system (right panel).   Figure 5 |  Global temperature change relative to 1986-2005 for the SRES scenarios run by CMIP3 and the RCP   scenarios runby Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5, see section 1.6.1). The number of   models is given in brackets and the shading (co  Figure 6 |  Timeline for the use of observed (pre-2005) and simulated CO2 (post 2005) concentrations in climate simulation   production available in the CMIP5 ensemble.   Figure 7 |  Time series of global annual mean surface air temperature anomalies (relative to 1986-2005) from   CMIP5 concentration-given experiments. Projections are shown for each RCP for the multi-model mean   (solid lines) and the 5 to 95% rang (± 1.64  Figure 8 |  Title as Figure 7. The red circle highlights the time period prior to 2050 where models run with all four RCPs   project similar changes in global surface temperatures.   Figure 9 |  Maximizing the coverage of precipitation, temperature and snow distributions with the lowest number of   simulations within a large ensemble.   Figure 10 |  Projected change in mean summer temperature (June, July and August) and mean winter   temperature (December, January and February). The changes are shown for an ensemble of GCMs  under three RCPs (2.6, 4.5 and 8.5). The elliptical lines indic  Figure 11 |  Example of the difference in grid cell size between a global climate models (left panel) with a resolution of   approximately 200 km and information that has been downscaled to a 45 km grid cell (right panel).   Figure 12 |  Comparison between dynamical and statistical downscaling techniques.   Figure 13 |  Example of delta/scaling post-processing technique. The relative change between A. the reference and the   future is first calculated and B. the change is then applied to the observed time-series.  Figure 14 |  Example of bias correction post-processing technique. The relative change between A. the reference and   the future is first calculated and B. the change is then applied to the entire simulated time-series.  Figure 15 |  Climate scenario construction done improperly A. by comparing future simulation values with past observed   values and done properly B. by comparing past and future simulated values.  Figure 16 |  Key criteria used to evaluate the climate information needs of decision-makers (adapted from Lu 200643).  Figure 17 |  Decision tree   Figure 18 |  Climate normals of mean annual temperature (°C) for the reference period 1971-2000. The values are   calculated using Environment Canada station data that has been interpolated on a 10 km by 10 km grid and   made available through an NRCan da  Figure 19 |  Historic annual total precipitation (mm) time series for the period 1901-2005 for an Environment Canada   homogenized climatological station46. Trends for 1901-2005 and 1971-2005 are shown in blue and red,   respectively.  Figure 20|  Maps of delta changes  Figure 21 |  Spatial analogue for the greater Toronto area for the 2080 horizon (2071-2100). A. The regions where   the recent climate (1971-2000) is similar to the climate projected for the greater Toronto area in 2080   (2071-2100). B. The regions where  Figure 22   |  Projected changes in mean temperature (°C) and total precipitation (%) for the provinces of New Brunswick   and Nova Scotia for the winter months (DJF, December, January, and February) for the horizon 2080   (2071-2100) in comparison to a 1  Figure 23 |  Climatic normals in the number of freezing-degree days for the period 1971-2000 along with projected   future values for this index for the horizons 2050 (2046-2065) and 2090 (2081-2100), calculated using an   ensemble of 79 simulations (75 f  Figure 24 |  Left: Evolution of the mean annual number of growing degree-days for the years 1971-2100 for the Greater   Slave Lake region. The values are calculated using an ensemble of 79 simulations (75 from CMIP3 and 4   from CRCM4), while the observat  Figure 25 |  Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the regional mean annual number of growing degree-days for the   reference period (1971-2000) and two future horizons (2050 and 2090) for the Greater Slave Lake region. The   values are calculated usi  Figure 26 |  A. Projected change in mean annual discharge (Qmean) for the 2041-2070 period in comparison with the   reference period 1971- 2000 using an ensemble of 89 CMIP3 simulations and B. mean annual hydrograph   for the reference and future periods   Figure 27 |  Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves for the St-Lawrence valley simulated for the present (aet) and future   (aeu) climate by the CRCM driven by a global climate model CGCM #4. The lines indicate the intensity for   events with four different   Figure 28 |  Extent of flood zone as simulated by synthetic scenario 9, presented in Table 8 (QT100 + 2000m3/s).    Table 1 |  Key characteristics of RCPs and similarities with SRES scenarios.    Table  2 |  The relative importance of the three sources of uncertainties in climate projections over time.  Table  3 |  Comparison of the advantages and limitations of both dynamical and statistical downscaling.  Table  4 |  Overview of three climate information categories, basic, intermediate, and detailed.   Table 5  |  Climate information formats associated with each of the three climate information categories.   Table 6 |  Summary of projected climate change for the province of British Columbia for the horizon 2050 (2041-2070)   in comparison to the reference period 1961-1990. Values are calculated using an ensemble of 30 global   climate model projections derive  Table 7 | Examples of climate indices or events with limited confidence   Table 8 |  List of nine what-if (synthetic) scenarios constructed to simulate changes in discharge along the Rivières-des-  Prairies, on the North shore of Montreal. Q2 and Q100 represent total annual discharges with a return period   of 2 years and 100 y  